[Amit Varma]: If you're a writer or a filmmaker or a musician or a photographer, bloody hell, what a time
[Amit Varma]: to be alive. We live in a golden age for creators. And this is clear when I think back, say,
[Amit Varma]: just 25 years. In 1995, when I was a writer, I had to attempt to please third parties to
[Amit Varma]: get my work out there. If I wrote articles, I had to submit them to newspapers or magazines.
[Amit Varma]: They were gatekeepers in my way. Even if I got through them, the formats in which I could
[Amit Varma]: write were fixed. The pay was a pittance, always coming through intermediaries who sold
[Amit Varma]: eyeballs for advertising. There was no way I could connect directly with my audience
[Amit Varma]: or even capture some of the value that I brought into their lives. Because the possibilities
[Amit Varma]: were limited, many of the things I could have done were left undone, unimagined, and therefore
[Amit Varma]: unseen. But between then and now, all those restrictions have vanished. Creators of
[Amit Varma]: all sorts have the means of production and distribution in their hands. They can play
[Amit Varma]: with different forms, they can connect with their audiences, they can form communities
[Amit Varma]: of those audiences, and they can get paid directly. This is so miraculous. And for someone
[Amit Varma]: like me, so exciting. I'm speaking into my microphone right now, directly to you. There's
[Unknown]: no one between us.
[Unknown]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen, our weekly podcast on economics, politics and behavioral
[Unknown]: science. Please welcome your host, Amit Bharma.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome to The Seen and The Unseen. If you're a creator, then there are many, many lessons
[Amit Varma]: to learn from my guest today, Roshan Abbas. Roshan, in a sense, was a new age creator
[Amit Varma]: in the old world before the new age. He started with theatre, became a radio superstar in
[Amit Varma]: the 1990s, moved on to television and rocked that scene, took his destiny into his own
[Amit Varma]: hands by starting an events management company called Encompass, made that big, sold it,
[Amit Varma]: wrote a play, made a feature film, wrote a couple of books, invested in a bunch of successful
[Amit Varma]: creator startups, and began Commune, a performance arts collective that has launched many careers.
[Amit Varma]: He didn't stick to one thing. He never ossified, which is the reason that his insights on this
[Amit Varma]: creator economy are so enlightening. I first came into direct contact with Roshan when
[Amit Varma]: he signed up for my online course, The Art of Clear Writing, and I've learned a lot from
[Amit Varma]: all our interactions since. In fact, just last weekend, I held a session for the alumni
[Amit Varma]: of my course on this brave new world for creators. It lasted three and a half hours, almost like
[Amit Varma]: a seen unseen episode, and many creators, including Roshan, shared their learning there.
[Amit Varma]: I was so charged by that session that I couldn't sleep all night. What an exciting world we
[Amit Varma]: live in. And what a lovely conversation I had with Roshan when I invited him for this
[Amit Varma]: episode. Before we get to it, though, a quick plug, registration is now open for the September
[Amit Varma]: cohort of The Art of Clear Writing. Head on over to indiauncut.com slash clear writing
[Amit Varma]: to register. And now a quick commercial break before Roshan Ambass takes the floor.
[Amit Varma]: Do you want to read more? I've put in a lot of work in recent years in building a reading
[Amit Varma]: habit. This means that I read more books, but I also read more long form articles and
[Amit Varma]: essays. There's a world of knowledge available through the internet. But the problem we all
[Amit Varma]: face is how do we navigate this knowledge? How do we know what to read? How do we put
[Amit Varma]: the right incentives in place? Well, I discovered one way. A couple of friends of mine run this
[Amit Varma]: awesome company called CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com, which aims to help people up level themselves
[Amit Varma]: by reading more. A few months ago, I signed up for one of their programs called the Daily
[Amit Varma]: Reader. Every day for six months, they sent me a long form article to read. The subjects
[Amit Varma]: I discovered went from machine learning to mythology to mental models and marmalade.
[Amit Varma]: This helped me build a habit of reading. At the end of every day, I understood the world
[Amit Varma]: a little better than I did before. So if you want to build your reading habit, head on
[Amit Varma]: over to CTQ Compounds and check out their Daily Reader. New batches start every month.
[Amit Varma]: They also have a great program called Future Stack, which helps you stay up to date with
[Amit Varma]: ideas, skills and mental models that will help you stay relevant in the future. Future
[Amit Varma]: Stack batches start every Saturday. Also check out their Social Capital Compound, which helps
[Amit Varma]: you master social media. What's more, you get a discount of a whopping 2,500 rupees
[Amit Varma]: 2,500 if you use the discount code UNSEEN. So head on over to CTQ Compounds at ctqcompounds.com
[Amit Varma]: and use the code UNSEEN. Up level yourself.
[Amit Varma]: Roshan, welcome to the scene and the unseen. Thank you at last. At last, yeah, we've been
[Amit Varma]: talking for a long time. And I'm also a little intimidated because this is actually my return
[Amit Varma]: to studios after COVID times. And I'm speaking with a sort of a radio legend from the 90s
[Amit Varma]: from a time I didn't even take audio seriously. You know, before we get talking about your
[Amit Varma]: life so far, how have the last few months been for you? Because it's been a very interesting
[Amit Varma]: time in the sense that our lives and all our habits and everything has changed. But it's
[Amit Varma]: also been a very fascinating time for creators where I personally I think in the last few
[Amit Varma]: months, I have learned more about the creator economy than I had probably done for years
[Amit Varma]: and years and a lot of it while things were sort of changing on the fly. So what was it
[Guest]: like?
[Guest]: No, I think it's, I mean, it's a great place to start because when the pandemic started,
[Guest]: I mean, my biggest passion nowadays is commune. And that's meant to be actually a place where
[Guest]: we are trying to just empower artists to do whatever they can. And we were doing it the
[Guest]: way we knew it, which was largely saying spoken word events, helping people learn poetry or
[Guest]: learn how to tell stories, trying to get a little bit of brand work, but it was a lot
[Guest]: of physical work. But, you know, in March last year, a financial company reached out
[Guest]: to us and said they want to do something for Women's Day. And we were very excited and
[Guest]: said, yeah, yeah, you know, we'll do an on-ground festival because we know how to do that. Well,
[Guest]: I mean, after SpokenFest, we built that. But they were like, no, we want a digital festival.
[Guest]: So I somehow I kept telling my team in April saying that, you know, God gave us this once
[Guest]: in a lifetime opportunity to test pilot how to do a digital festival. So we actually ended
[Guest]: up doing Instagram, Facebook, YouTube, all together, simultaneously. We had about concurrent
[Guest]: about 5000 people, which we thought was fantastic. I mean, in March last year, saying, oh my
[Guest]: God, we got 5000 people coming concurrently on to an event. But when we put out each of
[Guest]: those pieces of content by themselves, and we put a little bit of marketing money behind
[Guest]: them or push them, each of them crossed a million plus. And now suddenly for the brand,
[Guest]: this mattered a lot more. And we sat with the team and I said, guys, isn't this a great
[Guest]: way to actually do content? Because if for a brand, they're looking ultimately to say
[Guest]: what's been the reach and what's been the engagement and what's the call to action,
[Guest]: etc, etc. And everybody said, yeah, that's exciting. Maybe we can do this for brands
[Guest]: later. But in April, this is what we were doing day in day out. The first two, three
[Guest]: months. I mean, and though you asked me about the last couple of months I've gone I've rewound
[Amit Varma]: a little bit last few months was starting. So what happened was that the first two months
[Guest]: I told everybody saying guys, pause, just pause. I try and bring a lot of what I learned
[Guest]: from different places here. So one of the things that I had learned from a Tom Peters
[Guest]: book was about the VUCA world, right? I mean, and the VUCA world says, you know, volatile,
[Guest]: uncertain, chaotic, ambiguous worlds, which was essentially what happened when, and again,
[Guest]: what a reference to Afghanistan and when the American army went in. And they said, how
[Guest]: do you handle volatile, uncertain, chaotic, ambiguous situations. And so the first thing
[Guest]: you should really do is pause, take a pause, assess. And that's what we did. So I think
[Guest]: in the month of April, we assessed and we looked around and said, what can we do? And
[Guest]: then you know, there is this huge jump in attitude that we have at Commune. And it's
[Guest]: a home for creators. So what happened is that first month, I was talking to Quasar about
[Guest]: theater, Ankur Tiwari about music, Tess Joseph about acting, Sheena Khalid about, you know,
[Guest]: again acting in theater, and tons and tons of my friends, Cyrus, Gaurav, everyone. And
[Guest]: everybody was saying, what do we do? And that's when we just said, listen, you know, this
[Guest]: is really digital is an ocean of opportunity, right? And I love coming up with these little
[Guest]: ones. I told the team, I said, boss, pebbles of possibilities and oceans of opportunities.
[Guest]: And all the guys were like, ah, okay. And you know, what we did was we experimented
[Guest]: with about 27 different formats over three months. We would do a show at midnight, we
[Guest]: would do an Instagram live, we would be doing poetry while cooking. We would do all kinds
[Guest]: of things. And some would strike a chord, some would sink. But the joy of experiments
[Guest]: in the digital ether is the ones that don't work disappear. You don't owe anybody an explanation.
[Guest]: You tried and that's enough. But the ones that worked, we then started doubling down
[Guest]: on. And those over the last couple of months have actually bought a whole new identity
[Guest]: to what we do. So on the commune front, I was extremely happy with what we managed to
[Guest]: do. The team consolidated, creative teams learning how to work remotely was our next
[Guest]: big challenge. And you know, an Excel sheet is mostly anathema to a creator. But I told
[Guest]: these guys, listen, all I want you to do is every morning, I want a one hour call where
[Guest]: everyone just tells each other what are they up to. And every evening, if you can do a
[Guest]: catch up call. The evening calls actually I don't think happens so often because the
[Guest]: teams are all involved, but we do a weekend call. And this started getting the team to
[Guest]: work together a lot better because a they started respecting what the other person was
[Guest]: doing. So 10 creators tinkering in a corner what you know they're up to. So this gave
[Guest]: us a great way of working together. Because we had done a couple of these digital experiments
[Guest]: and we knew what was working now brand start noticing and saying, you know what to do.
[Guest]: We started doing that, I get the opportunity to speak at too many things. And I think sometimes
[Guest]: I'm blamed for I'm the resident gyani at most conferences on something or the other, because
[Guest]: I've had 11 different careers, you know, so I'll be called into a music conference and
[Guest]: a conference on media and something on digital and events, blah, blah, blah. But in all these
[Guest]: places, I make it a point to talk about all that we're doing because I am out there, almost
[Guest]: you know, Gary, I'm the trumpeter saying, hoga, right and optimism is something which
[Guest]: again, I was what's called the, the eternal reservoir of optimism. So it will happen,
[Guest]: it has to happen. So we did like, I mean, you won't believe Amit in June or June, we
[Guest]: were doing an online play. People like how can you do a play online said guys, if I had
[Guest]: a script called check, please, which was a play about a boy who's just moved to a new
[Guest]: city, a girl who's looking for love and how they blind date through the column in a newspaper.
[Guest]: This was the original script. I said, okay, in the age of Tinder, etc, why can we not
[Guest]: do a play where these are zoom meetings, right? Because and it worked and we got you and you
[Guest]: know, we when we were initially saying how do we audition people, we had to add one thing
[Guest]: to everyone's actor CV, which was your bandwidth, because we had a lovely girl in Goa, but her
[Guest]: bandwidth was so bad that she would just get, you know, thrown off every every rehearsal.
[Guest]: We're like, listen, we love your acting, but you just don't have internet. So very soon
[Guest]: resumes, you know, internet speeds, download speeds, camera pixels will be there. But we
[Guest]: did a play. And you know, the minute we did the play in the first play, we invited loads
[Guest]: of people. And this is where again, I use the power of our network to say, let's call
[Guest]: brands, let's call creators, let's call people who can spread the word. And the minute that
[Guest]: happens five brands will come back to you saying, can we do a variation of this for
[Guest]: students? Can we do this for X? And that's where the monetization comes in. So somewhere,
[Guest]: we were able to find these kind of experiments to monetize. We had a huge contract with Spotify
[Guest]: where we were doing, we were meant to go and do this podcasting national fest almost. So
[Guest]: what we did at Spoken Fest was to tease people with a little thing of what is podcasting.
[Guest]: So Unni came and spoke, Gaurav spoke, Mantra spoke. I did a little workshop which was more
[Guest]: about reminiscing about radio days and what I believe podcasting should be. And at the
[Guest]: end of that, we came up with a physical event at Spoken Fest called Pitch Fest. This Pitch
[Guest]: Fest threw up about 50 people who gave us podcast ideas and Unni and Amar, everybody
[Guest]: was there, Niha and everyone were there. And they all looked at it and said, you know,
[Guest]: this is great if you're getting 50 people at a festival who are interested in podcasting
[Guest]: with unique ideas. Can I tell a city story through poetry? Can I do a thing on women
[Guest]: criminals through the years? And, you know, and we just kept saying, this is good, this
[Guest]: is good, this is a great idea. Conversations on local trains in Bombay. And I said, these
[Guest]: are great ideas to experiment with. So we were already starting work on this. And we
[Guest]: said, hang on, we don't need to travel to 10 cities to find podcasters in the digital
[Guest]: world. If you if you're able, again, to to create enough of a racket around what you're
[Guest]: going to do, people will gather. And we started doing this. And because we learned a little
[Guest]: bit of digital marketing, and again, I wear a hat as one of the mentor investors at Glitch,
[Guest]: which is a digital agency. I mean, they are a highly creative agency. So I would often
[Guest]: just say, look, guys, we want to do this, what should we do? So I end up getting a lot
[Guest]: of free advice. We use that. And now we were lo and behold, doing a podcasting, five podcasting
[Guest]: workshops around themes, you know, and and at that point in time, I had, I hadn't heard
[Guest]: your podcast. Otherwise, I remember when the podcast festival happened, we were like, we
[Guest]: have to get you. But before that, I said, okay, Kalki has done a good piece with BBC,
[Guest]: let's get her. Kenny has done a good comedy podcast, let's get him. Pooja Dingra has done
[Guest]: a good thing with with food at its base, let's get her. Ranveer Allahbadia has done something
[Guest]: in motivation. So yes, we did have to use a little bit of the influencer pull on top.
[Guest]: But then I would run a little workshop on Anchor because I again, I dabble and tinker
[Guest]: with tech like crazy. I'll be the one trying one new app doing something. So I did all
[Guest]: of that. And the team joined in. So we managed to do this whole piece on podcasting, which
[Guest]: then suddenly told us that in the pandemic, one of the things that we noticed and we were
[Guest]: talking about this the other day at that on that midnight session of yours, where, where
[Guest]: we said that Sunday people had two to three hours extra in every day, minimum drive time,
[Guest]: commute time, useless meeting time, right. And meetings that could be emails, remember,
[Guest]: everybody's saying that. And so suddenly, we said, what do people want to do in those
[Guest]: two, three hours, they either want to improve themselves personally, or professionally.
[Guest]: Now, in the personal front, what are you saying, I can meditate, I can do some yoga, I can
[Guest]: exercise, I can spend time with my children, etc. It's a lot of that. In the professional,
[Guest]: it's what can I do as a skill enhancement. And commune can really help because in that
[Guest]: in this world, suddenly people were looking to do different things. So hey, I've got an
[Guest]: ah, can I learn poetry? I thought I was a writer, can I learn the art of writing. And
[Guest]: this started a whole new learning vertical for commune. So creative learning has become
[Guest]: a commune vertical. Online events has become a vertical for us. Content was always a vertical
[Guest]: for us. So what we used to do on ground would become videos that would go on air and do
[Guest]: really well on YouTube, etc. for us. That's what happened with commune. But this was just
[Guest]: one hat. So the event hat that I put on was a business in crisis. I also was president
[Guest]: of the event association. And therefore, looking out for all the event companies in India,
[Guest]: we kept knocking on the government's doors to little success. I mean, we did get a couple
[Guest]: of relaxations of events for 200 people, we ran a whole campaign on how to run safe events,
[Guest]: we managed to get some local relaxations, there was a small subsidy for artists that
[Guest]: we did. But this was what is happening for artists. Personally at Encompass, we did have
[Guest]: to take a couple of hits in terms of reducing staff, understanding that for a long time,
[Guest]: we would be a virtual production studio. Because virtual events, unlike physical events, physical
[Guest]: events are theater, virtual events are broadcast. So do you have a broadcast mentality? Thankfully,
[Guest]: we do because a lot of our people at Encompass have been ex broadcast people, I've recruited
[Guest]: people from radio, television, etc. And these people thrive. So strategy, creative, and,
[Guest]: you know, broadcast kind of content did well. All our physical production people suffered,
[Guest]: you know, traditional. And you suddenly also find that maybe, as agencies we were built
[Guest]: for big. You know, that nimble, agile 10-15 people agency, which is where you started,
[Guest]: has bloated to 300 people. And over the years, we had made some reductions. But those are
[Guest]: the kind of haircuts that everybody took. We took a salary cut ourselves there. Glitch
[Guest]: was doing well, obviously, everybody had a little bit of a pause for two, three months
[Guest]: when no one knew what was going on. Then they picked up again. In the middle of the pandemic,
[Guest]: we managed to sell one of our businesses. So Chatterbox, which was an influencer marketing
[Guest]: agency, which had gone through its ups and downs as well, suddenly found a great suitor
[Guest]: in a Canadian company called QU. And these guys came on board and said, hey, this is
[Guest]: a great influencer marketing company, which was why we'd invested in it. You know, and
[Guest]: Gaurav used to often sometimes turn to me and, you know, on a bad day, he'd turn and
[Guest]: say, why did we do this? And so when we sold it, he was like, okay, now I know why we did
[Guest]: this. And I'm like, I'm like, it's okay, it's not, it's not about the money. I mean, at
[Guest]: least for me, it isn't. And, you know, and that sort of built for us, these were the
[Guest]: businesses on the personal front, I got to spend a lot more time at home, I managed to
[Guest]: travel a couple of times because I'm one of those, okay, my parents are in Lucknow, I've
[Guest]: got to go, I must go. So I did a lot of that. I also got a little bit of time to learn.
[Guest]: So I attended a whole host of workshops, I attended your the art of clear writing, which
[Guest]: actually helped me so much. Thank you for that. No, it's, it's incredible how I've always
[Guest]: been a curious child, you know, so give me anything which is shiny as an object, and
[Guest]: I'll be the first one there. Sometimes I get over enthusiastic. I mean, over enthusiasm
[Guest]: is a little bit of a sometimes my flaw. But you know, like, I'll do your workshop. And
[Guest]: then I will and then a legion was doing this wonderful course for creators and Anuj Gosalia
[Guest]: from terribly tiny tails, he had done the creator course she did. But then she had an
[Guest]: angel investor course. Now I am a serial angel investor because of GSF and Rajesh Soni. And
[Guest]: I've done that for about eight, nine years. But in my heart, I'm looking at how does a
[Guest]: creative fund when will there be a creator fund. And this is what has happened in the
[Guest]: last five months that I've actually realized that a lot of mediums that used to play intermediary
[Guest]: between creators and audiences have just realized that they're not needed anymore. Right. And
[Guest]: so when you can get directly to an audience, then why not do it yourself. Now this power
[Guest]: to the creator is translating into likes, shares, subscriptions, that is becoming currency.
[Guest]: So social capital is translating into real capital. And this real capital is where by
[Guest]: you play an influencer to promote your brand or somebody to do a content piece, etc. But
[Guest]: the day is not far. And I mean, this is what I am just I'm really, really looking forward
[Guest]: to. I mean, if I find five companies, I'll invest in them today, which will do this whole
[Guest]: tokenization. I mean, the day you have the Amit token, the day there is an NFT of your
[Guest]: first show or just your sketch. I mean, why it hasn't happened, I don't know, but it will
[Guest]: it has to happen. The day you have play to earn I mean, the kind of things that are happening
[Guest]: in this space. This this is the creator economy. This is our second renaissance. This is a
[Guest]: time when you don't need the Medici family, every individual owner. I mean, every every
[Guest]: listener is your Medici family who will be your patron, you know, who will pay for you.
[Guest]: And this is the best time. And if we don't as creators take advantage of this now, I
[Guest]: go everywhere and talk about how the circle of intimacy you built. Right. And this is
[Guest]: it that either you'll have the circle of intimacy, or you still want to be huge. But when you
[Guest]: want to be huge, you need management, you need a team. And you know, you could do without
[Guest]: those trappings. But that's what suddenly makes the sale 100x. Right. I mean, Virat
[Guest]: needs that social management team. And you know, or there'll be a team of people who
[Guest]: are looking after the styling, etc, etc. You and I don't, we need great content and we
[Guest]: need to be able to find those. And I mean, and this will be the 100,000 10,000 true fans.
[Guest]: I really believe that there will be at least 10,000 true fans for a good creator. And 10,000
[Guest]: fans from whom you can get 1000 rupees a year. Right? That's a crore. Now how many of those
[Guest]: will exist is the challenge. You know, I sometimes see management agencies shaking and shivering,
[Guest]: they put on this brave front. But imagine if they're, if they disappear as intermediaries,
[Guest]: what are they doing for you? More often than not, they are, they're handling contracts,
[Guest]: they're handling a couple of your pain points, which is great. But you're losing 15 to 20%
[Guest]: there. Now, I believe that for good management agencies, it's a worthwhile expense. But then
[Guest]: comes the platform, right? The whole Apple fight that's happening with Epic Games, 30%.
[Guest]: Then comes YouTube, right? I mean, another platform and everyone's got their own rules,
[Guest]: right? So I mean, did anybody question why YouTube was giving you what they were giving
[Guest]: you per view? You just took it. It was, you know, manna from heaven. But we've got to
[Guest]: fight for it. We've got to turn and say, No, I am entitled to 75% of this earning. And
[Guest]: that will only happen when creators unite. So you know, so Lee is a bit of this socialist
[Guest]: who's going out there, you know, and I mean, she's creating waves in the US and I believe
[Guest]: that creators need to do that here. I believe this renaissance is upon us. And that's what
[Guest]: I've that's happened in the last so many months.
[Amit Varma]: Excellent. So we'll, you know, postpone talking about your personal journey for a while because
[Amit Varma]: this creator economy is something that excites me a lot. So let's continue. I have a bunch
[Amit Varma]: of questions for you. Before we get to the creative economy itself, something that struck
[Amit Varma]: me and I'll, you know, take your metaphor of the ocean of opportunity further, by pointing
[Amit Varma]: out that many creators, including me for a while, we tend to ossify ourselves into islands
[Amit Varma]: in this ocean and we don't look around us. And we are like, I have to do this, in the
[Amit Varma]: sense that you build your self image. You say that I'm a writer, I have to write a book.
[Amit Varma]: You say that I am so and so, I have to do this. I have to do filmmaking, but I have
[Amit Varma]: to keep pitching to producers and keep doing all of that, without realizing that the landscape
[Amit Varma]: has changed so much. That if you are a talented writer, there is something more than books.
[Amit Varma]: If you are a filmmaker, you can make your own movies as people like Casey Neistat and
[Amit Varma]: all have, you know, shown on YouTube. Everything has opened up in a big way. Now, going over
[Amit Varma]: your career, I find it incredibly exciting because you have just like in one interview,
[Amit Varma]: you spoke about how it's important to say yes, when our default is no. Every opportunity
[Amit Varma]: does come your way. You've kind of taken it, you've done radio, you've done events, you
[Amit Varma]: build so many things, you've thrown many things at the wall. Some of them have worked out.
[Amit Varma]: So you've always been open. You've never had that ossified image, but you work with so
[Amit Varma]: many creators. Do you see this as something you'd like to tell creators about that? Do
[Amit Varma]: you see this as a trap that you see people fall into? Because I obviously don't know
[Amit Varma]: as many creators as you, but even I can look around and look at people who I think are,
[Amit Varma]: their islands are too restricted in the view. They don't realize how much has changed.
[Guest]: No, you know, you're so right. And honestly, I will thank 2015 is a landmark year because
[Guest]: yeah, yes, you know, when I did radio and then I did television and events and all that
[Guest]: kept happening. But 2015 is when subculture, the subculture, which was comedy, indie music,
[Guest]: spoken word, you know, I would even say the startup tech culture, all of these were little
[Guest]: subcultures here. They started coming into their own. OML is the first people who actually
[Guest]: noticed this. And I think they did a very good job of it. And they focused on music
[Guest]: and comedy. And they started building that. Now they wanted to build it through live events,
[Guest]: which is what they attempted to do. They built a bunch of IPs, which they were creating.
[Guest]: And it started at that point in time. The issue was this, exactly what you said. People
[Guest]: were very happy doing one thing and saying, I'll just do this one thing. Well, the important
[Guest]: thing about the creator universe today is collaboration is key. But in collaboration,
[Guest]: the mentality that traditional mediums gave you always was use, abuse and run. Right.
[Guest]: And I hate this. Like I pointed this out to so many of my friends saying, listen, when
[Guest]: you started doing your show, you begged and borrowed and told those people saying, please
[Guest]: do this for free. You know, one day when I'll make money. But that's what's being solved
[Guest]: today. What's being solved today is, hey, there's a site called Copyright Exchange,
[Guest]: for example. Now it's to do with music. But imagine Copyright Exchange says you think
[Guest]: you're a great musician. Prove to me you're a great musician. So you've got a little bit
[Guest]: of a track record. You've done that. You then make me a contract which says for five years,
[Guest]: if you invest in this work and you can define the length of time, the amount, the volume,
[Guest]: the percentage. Right. Five years, 40 percent of my earning after this amount is yours.
[Guest]: Now you're doing a true creator contract. This hustle in the early stage and then, you
[Guest]: know, abuse later is default. It's default because people are like, you know, I've got
[Guest]: this one opportunity. Let me make everything. I have stood at comedy events on stage and
[Guest]: seen a great comedian. And I'm talking of the old when when Great Indian Laughter Show
[Guest]: had started, you know, and those that that set of comedians Hindi Heartland with 10 writers
[Guest]: behind them who are writing their jokes. And when I would go in because I was a host, so
[Guest]: I would introduce them. And then I'm curious and I love to talk to people. And I would
[Guest]: sit and say, what do you make? And then you'll have food. And it used to piss me off because
[Guest]: I'm like, this guy is actually equally a part of your thing. So why not pay him more? Why
[Guest]: not do more of this? This thing about collaborating is something which people need to do a lot
[Guest]: more. This thing about then collaborating and sharing, share commerce, share opportunity.
[Guest]: I have been knocking on so many creator, and you can call them collectives. And I've been
[Guest]: saying, if you believe in me and respect what I do, and I believe in you and respect what
[Guest]: you do, why can there not be a common contract between a couple of us which says, you know
[Guest]: what, we'll all succeed together. Let's try and figure out a way to work together. But
[Guest]: let's also do an equity swap. Now, it's a little too futuristic. People are like, no,
[Guest]: no, no, how will this work out? My valuation, your valuation, etc. Okay, you'll find a way.
[Guest]: But imagine, imagine 10 collectives working together who say, in the success of each of
[Guest]: us lies everyone else's success. And this is why the word commune, you know, I mean,
[Guest]: this word has been on my mind for many years, because I used to hear of art communes. My
[Guest]: father used to tell me about Osho, you know, and the commune. And sometimes these things
[Guest]: just stay with you in a residual manner. And when we formed it, we actually originally
[Guest]: wanted to create an incubation fund for creative ideas. If five years ago, you know, I had
[Guest]: met you before IBM, okay, what does it take to get this done? How? What will happen? What
[Guest]: step two or step three? Try and put it in some format, get brands on board then, and
[Guest]: let the creator be. The creator knows what they do best. I have sold my soul to serviced
[Guest]: creativity because of the work that I did with events, right? I mean, I used to tell
[Guest]: my teams and creatives at event, you know, in our event team saying guys, the first creative
[Guest]: is for you. Because up to the guy is going to make his birthday party. You gave the first
[Guest]: most honest. Now my best brands which worked with me for years are the ones who took my
[Guest]: first idea saying we believe in you. The other brands which also worked with us were the
[Guest]: ones who said, you know, I wanted this way and I wanted that way and I would move out
[Guest]: of the conversation because I was far more the creative ideation person there. And I'd
[Guest]: say, you know, they don't deserve your big idea. And that's what typically ends up happening,
[Guest]: you know, I think in advertising, etc. At some point, you start getting wedded to this
[Guest]: is what the brand wants. But ultimately, if you want to be honest to any brand, any platform,
[Guest]: it is what does the consumer want? Right? So I really feel that there needs to be far
[Guest]: more collectives. You know, there used to be an event called the coalition that OML
[Guest]: used to do. There are very few creator conferences, I went to South by Southwest three years ago.
[Guest]: I just, you know, I told my wife that I'm going to South by Southwest. I've always wanted
[Guest]: to go here. I took a backpack. I went from room to room and I saw 70 creators who were
[Guest]: AR creators, sharing their show. I mean, it was like, you know, displaying your wares
[Guest]: at a fair. But then everybody sat together, the evening was having a drink and discussing,
[Guest]: I can do this, I'm doing this, this is my problem. And people were solving together.
[Guest]: And this solving together is something we need to do. You know, who's going to figure
[Guest]: out, oh, how do I reduce background noise in your house, if you want to record your
[Guest]: podcast there, that's the solve. Who's going to say, okay, once your show has crossed so
[Guest]: many listens, there's a sale, that's the solve. Who's going to say, you know, managing the
[Guest]: guests for Amit, I mean, you don't need it. But like so many young people, the number
[Guest]: of people will be in your inbox saying, sir, come on to my podcast, who wets them to say,
[Guest]: you'd love to do them all because we all want to promote them, but which is really worthwhile.
[Guest]: Who has the listens, etc. So I think a lot of this needs to be done. And I hope and pray
[Guest]: that we can do some bits of it at Commune. We keep organically evolving every now and
[Guest]: then. But like, I mean, Pranika was my head of growth and strategy. And the joy of hiring
[Guest]: diverse people is this and Pranika walked in because she told us a coffee story. And
[Guest]: I just loved the story. I didn't know anything else about it. Then I realized, oh, oh, she's
[Guest]: an economics graduate. Oh, she's worked at a consulting firm amongst the top four. Oh,
[Guest]: she's also done finance, blah, blah, blah. And suddenly, you know, one day, this girl
[Guest]: walked in and said, listen, some of the things you're doing are great. Some of the things
[Guest]: you don't get, you don't know monetization. And I don't. She said, but I know I can help
[Guest]: you with monetization. And she came in and the other day, she was sitting and saying,
[Guest]: if we just built a division that made creator tools. Imagine and I mean, created tools as
[Guest]: simple as contracts, right? At our last festival, we promoted a small bunch of people who have
[Guest]: a I think it's called it's called contracts for creators, which is on Instagram. And they
[Guest]: just came and said, Listen, we're so sick of being gypped by people, we've created some
[Guest]: standard contracts that are available to people. I just come use a handle, let me promote it,
[Guest]: come do a little session with people, etc. That's what you need, you need to be able
[Guest]: to find these kind of tools, you know, oh, I need to do my billing. 80% of creators don't
[Guest]: know how to create a bill. Do they pay GST? Do they not? How much do they pay? When do
[Guest]: they pay? What's no clue, collections. And this is where the whole exploitation mafia
[Guest]: works in our business. And they've always worked in, you know, in that way. I remember
[Guest]: that when I started in radio, I had a goal to earn 10,000 rupees, because I had rent,
[Guest]: I was already married. These are some thankful accidents that happened along the way. So
[Guest]: the boss does not to come on a team of 200 rent, a 500 a day later, whatever. So when
[Guest]: I went to all India radio, they were giving me though they were putting me in their best
[Guest]: category, they gave me 750 rupees per show for six shows, there was a max you could do
[Guest]: because monopoly. So in all India radio, there was this rule, no, not more than six. I said,
[Guest]: if I'm good, why can't I have a daily show? No, no, sir, it's not allowed. Okay, so 4500
[Guest]: rupees, how do I make the rest? How do I make the 5500? And I do voiceovers. One day, Times
[Guest]: FM approached me and said, and I used to do a Hindi show. So they thought I can only speak
[Guest]: in Hindi. So the guy who came to meet me did this whole his name was Ajay Munjal. And he's
[Guest]: a lovely guy. I think he's still doing some work with them. And he came and said, Roshan
[Guest]: if you do a program with us, I said, buddy, I can do this conversation. And he was so
[Guest]: shocked. He said, you can do a program in English. I said, I can do it in English. I
[Guest]: can do it in Hindi. I can do it in spoken Urdu. I'm willing to do all three, but I need
[Guest]: 10,000 bucks. That was my pitch. And he turned and said, okay, you know, they kept trying
[Guest]: to tie me down to be an employee. I said, I won't be an employee. Creator becomes an
[Guest]: employee. Creator should not become an employee. Because I read it somewhere saying the minute
[Guest]: you're working for a salary for someone else, it's absolutely fine. But if you want to be
[Guest]: a creator, then your time is now beholden to someone else and they will define what
[Guest]: your creativity is going to. I mean, you know, I think you should do it this way, you know,
[Guest]: and because oh, I'm paying your bills. No, I think creators can be as independent as
[Amit Varma]: they want today. So I hope I'm not giving you a completely circus. No, this is lovely.
[Amit Varma]: And, you know, for my listeners, you know, for the writing community I run, we had this
[Amit Varma]: long session which went on for three and a half hours on Sunday night where Roshan joined
[Amit Varma]: us for a while and we spoke about the creator economy. And it's very interesting. You know,
[Amit Varma]: I'll quickly sort of sum up my thoughts on how things have changed and how that ties
[Amit Varma]: in with what you were saying. Number one, I think as far as you were talking about the
[Amit Varma]: exploitation mafia, you know, I've often on other episodes spoken about Jagdish Bhagwati's
[Amit Varma]: observation that Indians tend to have a rent-seeking mentality, where according to him, Chinese
[Amit Varma]: had a more of a profit-seeking mentality. And I don't know enough about the Chinese
[Amit Varma]: to comment on that part of it. But my theory for why Indians were always like this, why
[Amit Varma]: so many people will say I have a business idea, they make fun of it. You know, that's
[Amit Varma]: almost the mentality of going for it. And my sense of that was one that we had institutions
[Amit Varma]: which were rent-seeking all the way for decades, the only way to actually make money was to
[Amit Varma]: become part of that apparatus and exploit somebody else. You know, we didn't have those
[Amit Varma]: kind of free markets where like, how do you and I make money today, we add value to people's
[Amit Varma]: lives, and we get money. And it's what I call the double thank you moment. And I think a
[Amit Varma]: lot of this exploitation mindset is a habit that's come from the scarcity economy of the
[Amit Varma]: past, where even for creators, there might be limited opportunities. I think that changed
[Amit Varma]: drastically. And it changed drastically in really three ways. Like when I look back on,
[Amit Varma]: you know, between 1995 and say today, and I'm kind of amazed at what a forward thinking
[Amit Varma]: attitude you had in 95 saying I won't be a salaried employee, because I think that is
[Amit Varma]: a rational approach today. But it wouldn't have been the rational approach then. And
[Amit Varma]: the three ways it's in which it's changed to keep it brief for the listeners, because
[Amit Varma]: we want to get back to Roshan is that number one back in the day, if you were a creator,
[Amit Varma]: you had to go through an intermediary to reach your audience. So if you want to write opinions,
[Amit Varma]: for example, you have to pitch op-eds to newspapers, there are gatekeepers. And one of the
[Amit Varma]: consequences of that is that even if you break through, you're not writing enough. So you
[Amit Varma]: you know, iteration makes for excellence, you're not doing enough of that. And two,
[Amit Varma]: you are sort of bound by format ki 800 word likna hai and all of that, that's completely
[Amit Varma]: changed today, we can all reach audiences directly. And I think 2000 to 2012 was probably
[Amit Varma]: a transition period, but it's just grown enormously. Secondly, for money, you were again,
[Amit Varma]: dependent on these intermediaries, they would take your content, they would get advertising or
[Amit Varma]: in rare cases, subscription, but in India, most things were advertising, and you'd get a very
[Amit Varma]: tiny percentage of that. And third is tools, you simply did not have the tools to do things
[Amit Varma]: yourself. You know, you spoke about how creators today are much more collaborative,
[Amit Varma]: they talk to each other. And like just a few days back, I had an email exchange with our
[Amit Varma]: mutual friend Varun Duggirala, your partner in the glitch. And yeah, so he's setting up
[Amit Varma]: something for YouTube, I'm also setting up something for YouTube. So we were discussing
[Amit Varma]: kaunsa mic lena hai, kaise lights lene hai, discussing all of that. And both of us, of
[Amit Varma]: course, have kind of, through trial and error figured out a podcasting game, where today I can
[Amit Varma]: record something at home, which I would not have been able to in 95. I mean, forget the fact ki
[Amit Varma]: internet hi aisa nahi tha toh, you can't have conversations. So in these three ways, you can
[Amit Varma]: reach the audience directly, you can sort of make money directly from your audience through various
[Amit Varma]: ways. And the tools not just for writers, but even for filmmakers, like I think a lot of people are
[Amit Varma]: interested in filmmaking haven't realized to what extent YouTube is democratized at, and how cheap
[Amit Varma]: it really is. Like, when I was in college, I wanted to be two things filmmaker and writer.
[Amit Varma]: And I said ki nahi yaar, unlike you, I'm not a people person, I'm just extremely introverted.
[Amit Varma]: So I thought nahi yaar, filmmaking ke liye I have to work with other people, I have to sell my ideas,
[Amit Varma]: you know, and indeed in till 2015, I would have believed that nahi ban sakte hai, because,
[Amit Varma]: you know, both of us live around Versova. And that is really, you go to any cafe there,
[Amit Varma]: it's a graveyard of broken dreams, if you just listen to the conversations around you.
[Amit Varma]: And today all of that is possible. Like the editing software that I've just started using,
[Amit Varma]: I'm using the free version of DaVinci Resolve. But if you sold just the color grading part of
[Guest]: that in 2010, it would cost $800,000. I remember we used to go and do edits
[Guest]: for films in the early days, and you would go to prime focus studio, because they were the only
[Guest]: guys who had the smoke machine. Yeah, smoke machine kya hoti hai? No, no, no, you know,
[Guest]: and it was and you had to go there. Imagine now I'm grading stuff, which is being sent in a file
[Guest]: to some other country, it comes back the next day. So people are doing you know, efficiencies of that
[Guest]: level. But you know what you said that you're not a people's person, I am, I'm a people's person,
[Guest]: but I'm not a position person. See, very often in film, etc, you're meeting people,
[Guest]: aap aude se mil rahe hote hain, insaan se nahi. I bohot baar bolta hu, oh, the CEO of so and so,
[Guest]: how is that important, right? And it's more important to meet the creative writer, etc.
[Guest]: So like even at Commune, we started a small division called Crave, which is our holistic
[Guest]: management division. I mean, if I call it artist management, Ankur will kill me. We said no,
[Guest]: we don't want to, we don't want to be brokers, we want to be hand holders for life. We want to be
[Guest]: able to say what is it that you crave? Like, you know, and we built this really fun little form,
[Guest]: which when we send to people, they read it and say, bada maza aaya hai yaar isko bharke,
[Guest]: because humne poocha, do you crave to be in a newspaper in a headline? Or do you crave to learn?
[Guest]: Or do you crave a collaboration? Who is the one person if you saw yourself sitting next to in a
[Guest]: conference, you'd be happy? So people, people haven't answered these questions. They're like,
[Guest]: yaar yeh vada accha sawal poocha. You know, like, so, so it's that, that we really want to be able
[Guest]: to say that, that if I was to be able to actually say, hey, listen, by this is the platform you
[Guest]: need to do, go to, like, see, you're discussing, again, what you said about Varun and you, right?
[Guest]: You're discussing lights, etc. Are you discussing how will you make money from YouTube and how much
[Guest]: money will they give you? That's the conversation that people shy away from. You know, my mother
[Guest]: will often say, baat mat kara karo, kitte baise binata hoon. Main sir se bolte, mujhe kuch farag
[Guest]: nahi padta. I'm like, kya ho jayega? What's the big deal? The first time I remember, I had an
[Guest]: exchange and genuinely, I mean, my respect for what you do in the show is very different. I mean,
[Guest]: I love what you do there. But when I asked you how many listens you have, you didn't shy away
[Guest]: from answering me. 90% of people will not give you a correct answer, right? I do well. I'm doing
[Guest]: decently. Good at interiors of Bihar. Say it. You know, because only when you say it, only when you
[Guest]: share the problem and say, you know what, I have the same problem. And, and, you know, we had a
[Guest]: little bit of a discussion that day where some people were like, no, no, data is not critical.
[Guest]: And I keep trying to explain to them saying, listen, vanity metrics I'm not talking of.
[Guest]: You know that your engagement is 40 minutes. That is a metric worth selling. But many people shy
[Guest]: away from measurement because they don't want to be measured. Because they are hobbyists and not
[Guest]: creators. And in life, what you said, the graveyard of broken dreams. People live on dreams. It's
[Guest]: fine. I'm happy. I think I'm a creator. Are you willing to take the bull by the horns and say,
[Guest]: are you really a creator? Vijay Nair and I had had a conversation in the early days of comedy
[Guest]: when I said, how do you realize what to sell this person's show for? And he said, you know,
[Guest]: if a corporate comes to me and we were talking about because I was discussing, I want four
[Guest]: comedians for a corporate event, and he quoted a price. And I said, tell me, how did you arrive
[Guest]: at this? And he said, Roshan, see, a thousand seater would have sold at 500 rupees a ticket
[Guest]: for these guys. That's five lakhs. That is their public cost. Now you want a private show,
[Guest]: right, which is only for this limited audience, the numbers might be smaller,
[Guest]: but it has to be at least 2x of this because that person is not going to get the same response,
[Guest]: the numbers are smaller, etc. You're doing it exclusively. There's no 100 people who are going
[Guest]: to tweet about it, etc., because they want it private. That's the price you pay for exclusivity.
[Guest]: Or Veer today has done, I mean, during the pandemic, he said something so wonderful,
[Guest]: because we were on a conference. And he said, listen, I think there will be two layers of
[Guest]: ticketing in the future. There will be the exclusive 100 people who can be socially
[Guest]: distanced and willing to pay 10,000 rupees. And I need those 100 people because without that
[Guest]: laughter, without that feedback, I can't exist. He says, and then there will be a 10,000 people
[Guest]: at a 100 rupees. Right, so it will be exactly the reverse. And this will become the economy.
[Guest]: But nobody discusses these numbers. People don't talk about how many views are real,
[Guest]: how many are fake. I recently found a site and I'm going to experiment with it, which will tell
[Guest]: you the total number of fake followers you have. And I really want to do one anonymous account
[Guest]: every day put out saying, hello, this is the number of fake followers you have. Because,
[Guest]: again, I think being a creator is a God given gift. If you can do it, then you bloody well do
[Guest]: it well. You know, and if you need to do it, do it with a focus, you know, I mean, work towards it,
[Guest]: measure yourself, measure what matters, see what you can do next, collaborate. And,
[Guest]: you know, the morning show which came on Apple is one of the big shows with Jennifer Aniston,
[Guest]: etc. There is a there is a scene in there where I'm forgetting the actress's name,
[Guest]: my wife will kill me. But when she's a small town reporter, but she's really got the people's pulse,
[Guest]: and they get her in. And when she comes to New York, and she sees the studio and everything,
[Guest]: and she gets asked all the questions, etc. And initially, they're just taking off on the fact
[Guest]: that her view on I think her view on abortion is different from what the majority says,
[Guest]: and therefore, she might have to go back. And Jennifer Aniston picks her up, and she was taking
[Guest]: the car to go to the airport and brings her to the studio. And she says, Why are you doing this?
[Guest]: He says, because you've been given the God given gift of being able to do this. And you cannot do
[Guest]: yourself the disservice of running away from it. There's one word that you have to learn,
[Guest]: and that is to be relentless. I mean, being relentless defies me, like I go after something,
[Guest]: and then I stick to it. Once I've achieved it, I move very quickly off it. You know,
[Guest]: I've done it, I've done Encompass, built it, I've sold it, I'm out. I'm concerned for the people,
[Guest]: but I need to move to the next bigger canvas. What can I do next, etc. But I think those are
[Guest]: the things that you know, you know, I mean, I don't know whether that's the right word.
[Guest]: I was thinking, what does Nilesh say? Don't be half hearted.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, yeah. For the listeners before the show, we were just chatting about,
[Amit Varma]: and Roshan had just heard my episode with Nilesh Mishra. So that's where the mention comes from.
[Amit Varma]: Before I go to my next question, you spoke about how we spoke about the different layers of
[Amit Varma]: ticketing. And it's very interesting that Kevin Kelly in 2009 or 10 wrote this essay called 1000
[Amit Varma]: True Fans. And the funda behind the essay then, which seemed outlandish to many people is that as
[Amit Varma]: a creator, you don't need to scale. As a creator, if you've got 1000 people who pay $100 per year
[Amit Varma]: for you, that's $100,000 a year. That's a lot of money, can you get there? Now at that point,
[Amit Varma]: it would have seemed that very few creators can really do that. Today, I think it's becoming
[Amit Varma]: more and more of a reality for people. You see people like that on Substack, for example,
[Amit Varma]: who have people pay $100 a year, which is a very standard subscription fee and have thousands of
[Amit Varma]: followers. And similarly, that was also developed into the 100 True Followers who will pay $1000
[Amit Varma]: each. Here's my next question. So it's going to be kind of long winded. It's really two questions
[Amit Varma]: in one because it seemed related. Number one, what I often tell young creators, and which I
[Amit Varma]: think has worked for me in serendipitous ways, it's not like I knew it before, it's just worked
[Amit Varma]: for me. And now I figured it out, is that don't get too obsessed with the metrics. Creators tend
[Amit Varma]: to overestimate the short term and underestimate the long term. So therefore, they think,
[Amit Varma]: and that doesn't really happen. It takes a long time to get going. So initially,
[Amit Varma]: there will be no metrics. I often talk about you know, how Ali Abdaal, who's a YouTube creator,
[Amit Varma]: when he was on YouTube, he did this 50 first videos. Yeah, he did this video when he reached
[Amit Varma]: a million subs. And he pointed out that when he made his 50th video, he reached 1000 subs on that
[Amit Varma]: day. And I think most of us most young creators, it would get so disheartened. If they're on video
[Amit Varma]: 40 and they have 800 subscribers, they'll just stop it takes so much effort. But Abdaal's point
[Amit Varma]: and Abdaal in fact went on to give in a separate video, more advice to creators, which I think
[Amit Varma]: applies, which is that for two years, make two videos a week, which comes to a total of 200
[Amit Varma]: videos without looking at the metrics. Now, one, I think this is great advice, because only endless
[Amit Varma]: iteration leads to excellence, you start doing something you're bad, you do it again and again,
[Amit Varma]: you're good. So this is one part of the puzzle, but an almost contradictory part of the puzzle
[Amit Varma]: and something that you've been stressing about, and even Varun was stressing about how he looks
[Amit Varma]: at data so closely, is that you need to look at the data, because that's part of building an
[Amit Varma]: audience, you need to figure out what's working, what's not working. And you also need to kind of
[Amit Varma]: focus on that. So how does one reconcile the two? And the second question, which I think is linked
[Amit Varma]: to this is and this, you know, I've done this old episode on agriculture, and I'll tell you,
[Amit Varma]: I bring it up here. But one of the things we discussed in that was that not allowing large
[Amit Varma]: land holdings or corporatization of agriculture means that every farmer also has to be an
[Amit Varma]: entrepreneur. And that is not fair. A person may be good at farming, but bad at being an entrepreneur,
[Amit Varma]: which might mean therefore that most of these farmers are bad entrepreneurs, because they're
[Amit Varma]: two separate skills. And therefore the exploitation economy sucks them up. Now, it's a similar thing
[Amit Varma]: that in this modern age, where yes, creators can reach audiences directly, they can get money out
[Amit Varma]: of audiences directly, the tools of production are with them. But equally, to take advantage of this,
[Amit Varma]: it seems to me that every creator is also being asked to be an entrepreneur at the same time.
[Amit Varma]: And I understand that there are plenty of people like some of the things you do, no doubt,
[Amit Varma]: who are saying that we'll enable this, we'll take the friction out of many of the entrepreneurial
[Amit Varma]: things you have to do, like making bills and all that, which is useful. But if you don't have the
[Amit Varma]: entrepreneurial mindset, like which I didn't for the longest time, my thing was, my whole life is a
[Amit Varma]: story of you do one labor of love after another. And I got lucky that this clicked because honestly,
[Guest]: Roshan, I did not think entrepreneurial. Cricket, poker, writing. So I did everything,
[Amit Varma]: I didn't make money from anywhere, and then I kinda got lucky. But how does one resolve this?
[Amit Varma]: Like if a guy says, Roshan, I want to do art, I want to write a book, I want to do all that,
[Amit Varma]: I don't know Excel files, you know, I don't want to think about all this, I don't want to think about
[Amit Varma]: metrics. So on one hand, he might say, Amit, I agree with your advice, don't look at metrics,
[Amit Varma]: don't look for validation, you know, do labors of love. That's what makes for excellent
[Guest]: content in the end. So no, see, let's take part one, which was the whole thing about data and
[Guest]: whether you want to see it or not, whatever, etc. Why is it important to look at data today is
[Guest]: because it's not one, see, the days when I started, there was radio and there was only radio.
[Guest]: And in the evening, you watch TV for two hours. You didn't watch TV through the day, right? You
[Guest]: had nothing on your phone. There was, in fact, I remember, I must have got my first phone in what,
[Guest]: 97 or something, right? So because there was a positive media, there was sustained attention
[Guest]: available. So therefore, you just did one thing or whatever. Now today, what happens is, I can
[Guest]: tell you that if I actually took a piece of your content, I could create about 75 pieces of content
[Guest]: for various mediums from this one episode, the best quotes, right, the best solutions. So therefore,
[Guest]: entrepreneurial, 10 hacks for creativity, the best quotes, I mean, top 10 of the day, blah, blah,
[Guest]: blah, you know, whatever. So now, if you did all of this, it is today available that which of these
[Guest]: should go on to Snapchat, which of these should go on to Insta, which of this should go on to
[Guest]: Twitter, what. Now, a creator sometimes, most creators know what their core audience is.
[Guest]: Sometimes you don't. Sometimes you suddenly discover saying, why am I popping on Insta?
[Guest]: And you won't know why. But that's where the data can help, right? There was this whole debate,
[Guest]: discussion that day about visual, I'm far more visual, should I be on Instagram? And I was like,
[Guest]: listen, when you're on Instagram, that's a good gateway. But what are you leading them to? Are
[Guest]: you connecting them to one of these six sites that are for great photographers? And I can tell
[Guest]: you who they are. Now, you can build your own site. And this takes me now to part two of your
[Guest]: question. You can build your own site, which means be an entrepreneur, find a great person,
[Guest]: you build a great site, but your load time was bad. And therefore, 80% of people came and left
[Guest]: you. You didn't know this because you were not a techie. Now, there is a beautiful site called
[Guest]: Yellow Corner. You go to Yellow Corner, which curates pictures from the best photographers in
[Guest]: the world and puts them up, has optimized the site, delivers HD quality, etc, has also got
[Guest]: physical galleries to display your work. This is when you choose that for the exposure, what are
[Guest]: you willing to pay? This has been the A&R model for music for the longest time. I mean, you know,
[Guest]: people used to go as A&R artists, you know, and I've often been asked what it stands for,
[Guest]: I think it's artists and repertoire, if I'm not mistaken. But these were people who would go and
[Guest]: go through the bars of cities, listening for voices, find that person, invest in the person,
[Guest]: take them to the studio and record with them. This is what Magna Sound and BMG, Crescendo, etc,
[Guest]: did when they discovered the Lahir Mehendis, etc. This is what T-Series does even today.
[Guest]: But what they do there is saying, look at the size of opportunity, I will take all your pain away,
[Guest]: but what are you willing to pay me for it? This is where creators get cheated.
[Guest]: And here is where if creators talked to each other, they would be aware of what they could
[Guest]: make. I know of so many friends who made films, shows, whatever, who have not known what their IP
[Guest]: is worth, who have not known what their value is and have regretted and been bitter about it for
[Guest]: the rest of their life. Right? Somebody had once told me saying that Sunil Gavaskar sometimes is
[Guest]: just very unhappy about the fact that he was the man who was the backbone of Indian cricket,
[Guest]: but there weren't enough sponsors in those days. So there was those four sponsors which you might
[Guest]: have had, right? Simons for the bat and, you know, one Gillette I remember or something.
[Guest]: But today you've got 300 sponsors chasing those cricketers who may have won 100th craft,
[Guest]: you know, and that must be irking a person saying, there was no opportunity at that time. But
[Guest]: now there is an opportunity, what are you willing to pay for that opportunity, for the exposure,
[Guest]: for taking the pain away? And this is where again, you know, what you said about the creator who
[Guest]: doesn't make it. This is what Legion says in a beautiful article talking about the creator
[Guest]: middle class. What is the creator middle class going to do? And if you notice, every platform
[Guest]: right now has put up this honey trap of saying, I built a billion dollar fund, I built a hundred
[Guest]: million fund, Clubhouse has built it, Snap has built it, Spotify has built it, TikTok has built
[Guest]: it, everyone has built it. Moj has built it, TakaTak has built it. They're only doing it
[Guest]: because they're saying, look, boss, I want to pay you because I value you being here.
[Guest]: Even if you're anonymous, I want you to be here because even if you get me 100 people,
[Guest]: and there is 10,000 of you, that's a crore. So those are the kind of numbers that even the
[Guest]: faceless masses of creators can get to a platform. But can they monetize it? No,
[Guest]: because you built metrics which says only when you cross a particular point. And that's where
[Guest]: I don't know whether there'll be even whether I'm actually talking about the unionization of
[Guest]: creativity. But it's just that what should the least person be able to get? Should they get
[Guest]: or shouldn't they get? How will they get it? They have to be able to prove that they've got some
[Guest]: value, which is where again, data comes into play. So I'm saying it's a cycle and it's something
[Guest]: that people need to understand. It's the same thing that sometimes went to Prithvi, right?
[Guest]: For the longest time, I was thinking about Prithvi was the Lux Sabun of theater, right?
[Guest]: Okay, Prithvi performed, now I'm a recognized actor. I don't worry about money. But right after
[Guest]: the recognition, what's next? How will I get a film? Did someone come and see my show? Did I get
[Guest]: noticed? Right? And I and again, I think very often people hide behind this.
[Guest]: He'll support you. Yeah, what I keep saying that the Renaissance and the Medici which people talk
[Guest]: about, right? I mean, that was what happened there. You had patrons who were there, there was
[Guest]: no starving artist. You know, the starving artist is a myth at that point in time. So you were
[Guest]: getting, you know, commissions, you were making portraits, you were painting the Sistine Chapel,
[Guest]: all these things were also happening. And there were 100 people below who were getting maybe
[Guest]: arbitrage or whatever, maybe a little less because you were just filling in the...
[Guest]: But that's kind of survivor bias. I mean, there were 1000 people below that are starving,
[Guest]: perhaps. But I do believe and again, this whole thing about, I think one big reason,
[Guest]: which has also helped the creator economy, and I was thinking it after our discussion that way was
[Guest]: the cashless economy. See, imagine, today you don't, I on one of my workshops had somebody
[Guest]: joining me from Scandinavia. I'm like, why? But there was one Indian sitting there who heard me
[Guest]: on radio at some stage and joined. Now, if there was no cashless economy and this ability to
[Guest]: transfer money digitally, would I ever have been able to do it? So I think we must also understand
[Guest]: that this, the fact that there's a cashless economy. Now, the next level of the cashless
[Guest]: economy is, here comes the famous word, Bitcoin, crypto, Ethereum, all of this,
[Guest]: which people are not understanding. I saw a documentary this morning, 20 minute piece,
[Guest]: I mean, blew me away about this game in the Philippines called Elfie, which is a play to
[Guest]: earn game. Started during the pandemic, you create a character online and you keep this
[Guest]: character alive. If the character wins a couple of rounds, etc, etc, you get something called
[Guest]: SLP, single love potion. The SLPs when collected can be converted to crypto. You can sell it for
[Guest]: crypto. And today there is this wonderful tweet where this person said that my kid who's all of
[Guest]: 11 has played this game, built these SLPs, converted them to crypto, sold the crypto for
[Guest]: this currency because it was performing better, converted it. She says, my kid is earning more
[Guest]: than I am, 11 year old child. Now, look at this thing, what's happening tomorrow. Again,
[Guest]: I'm saying this, that when your token, oh, to meet with Amit, you need to spend 1000 tokens,
[Guest]: people will. To take a copy of the episode, you need to give 100. To attend the clear writing
[Guest]: course, you need to give 500. Every creator will build this economy of intimacy. Or as I keep
[Guest]: saying, there will be this economy which will be this explosive. I don't know what the word should
[Guest]: be for it. I mean, is it the you know, what is the opposite of intimacy? You've used the term
[Guest]: intimacy at scale. Intimacy at scale. Because last year, we were in a music conference and someone
[Guest]: said the rise of the singer songwriter. I said no, it is the rise of intimate conversation because
[Guest]: people were craving. Suddenly, you couldn't do a video with 60 background dancers and 40 locations.
[Guest]: So everything else got paired out and all that remained was the music, the lyrics and the voice.
[Guest]: Now you are talking pure music. Now you are actually going back to the Rafi Lata days.
[Guest]: Because nobody's going to be able to do voice synthesizer. Nobody's going to be able to give
[Guest]: you that little flip of this button, etc. and make you sound great. This is where the true
[Guest]: value of a creator came. Now people started, there's a boy on Instagram called Bhuvan,
[Guest]: I love his songs. Another one called Osho Jain, who I discovered last year.
[Guest]: Ankur has been obviously Prateek and Ankur have been great. Look at the rise of Prateek Kohar.
[Guest]: Prateek is not an overproduced artist. Look at Ankur. Ankur is not a like doesn't go with 300
[Guest]: pieces or whatever five piece band and doing whatever. But he's the guy who's doing the
[Guest]: music supervision for Gully Boy. Prateek Kohar is on Obama's playlist. Because this is pure
[Guest]: creativity. And I think intimate experiences have done this. Why do people come to your course
[Guest]: because they get value in terms of the course. They get value in terms of the cohort. I mean,
[Guest]: that that prompt is something that I can't write for the prompt. I feel so shit I couldn't write
[Guest]: today. But then I'll read a brilliant piece and it'll inspire me to write. That's what
[Guest]: online education MOOCs have failed. Right? So this massive online courses have gone.
[Guest]: They just don't work that completion rates of 8% if I'm not mistaken. Right? During the pandemic,
[Guest]: they shut up. So I think everyone's valuation went. But then somebody said, you know what,
[Guest]: doing this course, letting the people gather, letting them have conversations. Suddenly,
[Guest]: the course head appears and says, I've got something new for you. Hey, I just discovered
[Guest]: this. On a WhatsApp group, you share something which you just read. Oh my god, the master has
[Guest]: given us something to do. It's a beautiful frame framework. I mean, I think this is what will really
[Amit Varma]: create future creator economies. Yeah, and it's not just core said like, for my listeners,
[Amit Varma]: the community that Roshan is talking about is all the past cohorts of my clear writing course have
[Amit Varma]: come together and formed something called the clear writing community. So more than,
[Amit Varma]: I think 750 people active on it. And the thing is, there's no core set. It's voluntary,
[Amit Varma]: it's free to join for people who've done the course, and different people run different
[Amit Varma]: parts of it. So one person runs a nonfiction book club, there's a fiction book club,
[Amit Varma]: they meet every month, there's stuff happening on discord. So most of the time,
[Guest]: I don't even know what is the latest thing. It's kind of taken over. And so when
[Guest]: so I do my business storytelling course, and I'm telling you my metric of success is the day that
[Guest]: that happens. Right now, I've got 100 people who've done the course, it's done really well,
[Guest]: a lot of corporates pick it up and do it individually for themselves. And I really and,
[Guest]: and honestly, to the people who did version one, two, and three of the course, it has kept evolving
[Guest]: because I do as a trainer or as a person was understanding am I delivering value? What is
[Guest]: the real value I'm delivering? And I'm extremely conscious. I mean, my parents are both teachers,
[Guest]: all my life, it's been drilled about this thing of saying, you know, knowledge is the key that
[Guest]: you carry with you for life, it'll unlock some door, but don't waste it. And therefore,
[Guest]: this whole thing of I know it, I must pass it on, I must is a huge thing with me. So when I do it,
[Guest]: I actually feel that when I was in Dubai, I did a course, which suddenly I changed from
[Guest]: two, I used to do a weekend course over two days for two, two hours and whatever,
[Guest]: I just felt it's too little. And then I split it into four over two weeks. And I saw it evolve.
[Guest]: And I saw that the gaps in between gave them time to do things, to interact, to make mistakes,
[Guest]: to get, you know, feedback from me. I said, Hey, this is actually the real structure,
[Guest]: you know, so, so it also evolves over a period of time as you do it. And then when you hit the
[Guest]: sweet spot, you end up with the kind of community that you've got. And as you rightly said, the
[Guest]: true power of a community is when the members of the community own every aspect of it. When I get
[Guest]: feedback on something that Commune has done, which comes in, this was horrible. I love the fact you
[Guest]: care enough to respond. Otherwise, what you do just scroll on, you know, at a at a YouTube shorts
[Guest]: conference where they were because they were they said nobody can escape this vertical format.
[Guest]: Somebody said from an advertising agency, you know, sometimes they get these really pithy ones,
[Guest]: but they said that the minute you shift from vertical to horizontal, you shift from lack of
[Guest]: focus to attention. I thought it was such a beautiful thought at that moment. And it also
[Guest]: worries me, you know, I feel that this, I have to get your attention in 30 seconds, how will you ever
[Guest]: discover a person in 30 seconds? Right? How will you ever have a deep conversation? How will you
[Guest]: let layers of that person peel off to see the real person itself 30 seconds of let me show you a
[Guest]: dance? And you know, this is our medium, you don't stop being you know, a boomer. Okay, maybe I'm
[Guest]: being a bit of a boomer in this. But really, anybody who is 40 plus has seen the best of both
[Guest]: worlds. I think we saw an analog life and we seeing a digital life and we are Janice standing
[Guest]: in the middle, looking at December, the December of analog and the January of digital. And it's
[Guest]: there and you're there in the middle of it. And it's beautiful. But I look at my kids today, I
[Guest]: look at my daughter's 14 who's, thankfully, because every time I travel abroad, I'm we are seeing 10
[Guest]: plays in 15 days. And my kids are like, initially they were like, oh, but now they've developed a
[Guest]: love for theatre. Now my daughter says I want to be a Broadway performer, so be it. But it's only
[Guest]: because you have given them that. And yes, short for me, you know, to indulge, to focus, to dive
[Guest]: deep, this diving deep and I and maybe again, it's with maybe maybe we were equally distracted when
[Guest]: we were young, maybe, but I look for depth today. I mean, I think that's what I'm looking for. And
[Guest]: and I love that. And it resonates deeply with me.
[Amit Varma]: I'll tell you, this is one thing where I kind of you're talking about short attention spans,
[Amit Varma]: I disagree slightly in the sense that when I started the scene in the unseen early 2017,
[Amit Varma]: my impression was short attention span. Okay, you got to hook them in 30 seconds,
[Amit Varma]: your average listening time might be two minutes or three minutes. 20 minutes is optimal length.
[Amit Varma]: So if you look at my early episodes, like today, someone on Twitter commented that she's reached
[Amit Varma]: episode 50 from episode one. Yeah. And I was like, no, no, you're doing it the wrong way. Please
[Amit Varma]: listen in reverse order. Because those early episodes, one of the things I learned is that
[Amit Varma]: I was wrong. People don't have short attention spans. What happens is that podcasts are uniquely
[Amit Varma]: different. Because of a number of reasons, I'll give four for the benefit of listeners who may
[Amit Varma]: not have heard me expound on this before. But it's a subject I'm passionate about. So why not?
[Amit Varma]: One, if you look at when people listen, they are commuting or working out or doing errands,
[Amit Varma]: but they've chosen to be a captive audience. So when you're watching a YouTube video, you can
[Amit Varma]: just click on a tab, turn your head, pick up a book, those distractions aren't there, they've
[Amit Varma]: chosen to be captive. Two, the brain can comprehend language at 500 words a minute,
[Amit Varma]: while we speak at about like, I am pretty slow at my age. So it's about 160 a minute, but
[Amit Varma]: 200 is not more than that. So people listen at double speeds, they're consuming two hours of
[Amit Varma]: content in really one hour or even less. You know, Krish Ashok, who's been a guest on the show,
[Amit Varma]: listens to the scene in the unseen at 3x. I can't listen to it at less than, you know,
[Amit Varma]: less than 2x or never. Two and a half is normal. So the content is getting consumed. And the third
[Amit Varma]: thing is, of course, intimacy, the point that you sort of brought about that every every other medium
[Guest]: is broadcasting. So what? Yeah, so they are... No, you know, I didn't mean that people have
[Guest]: short attention spans. What I meant is that formats are only allowing you. See, TikTok is
[Guest]: saying do it in 30 seconds. You're putting everything in that. So people will find the
[Guest]: other mediums as well. But I feel that if you see, nobody can escape right now that the three formats
[Guest]: that are working are Reels, it's TikTok and now Facebook and like, sorry, YouTube Shorts.
[Guest]: These are the three. So if you want to get more followers on any of these mediums,
[Guest]: indulge in any of these, you will see 100x growth. Otherwise you won't. Now, everybody's
[Guest]: falling onto this trap, which suddenly means you're trying to crunch everything and say,
[Guest]: you know what, how can I be really exciting in 30 seconds? You know, and I do a storytelling
[Guest]: course and I keep talking about the hook and then I talk about, you know, saying what's the hook and
[Guest]: what's going to bring them in. But it's fine, you know, you'll get that hook. But I can't tell you,
[Guest]: if you scroll through these for a while, they are dopamine hits. But after a while, comfortably numb,
[Guest]: my favorite song has always been comfortably numb. You know, and I keep saying that,
[Guest]: I say, you know, that is just become, I don't want to see people sleepwalking through
[Guest]: Zeynep Tufekci. Have you ever read Zeynep? Of course, right. So Zeynep, when she talked about
[Guest]: the whole Arab Spring, and how quickly it moved on, she said, you know, you felt that these
[Guest]: digital tools gave you this ability to change the world overnight. And then you realized it
[Guest]: can't be changed overnight. You realized you need to sit on protests for 40 days. And you were like,
[Guest]: but on Twitter, it takes me 30 seconds to type this. I don't need to sit outside for so long.
[Guest]: And that essay, and that YouTube thing, which was there, had me thinking for a very long time,
[Guest]: saying that, are we losing steam in all our political battles because of this? That we
[Guest]: just don't have the courage to be there? Will you sit at a location for 100 days? Will you be part
[Guest]: of these protests with the farmers for a half a year? Can you do it? And I believe that 90%
[Guest]: can't do it. And again, I'm saying, it's a little philosophical. I think we're all trying to say,
[Amit Varma]: Zeynep wrote this excellent book also. And I did an episode with Pranay Kotasane on it. Pranay's
[Amit Varma]: term for this is radically networked societies. So that was kind of fascinating. But my sort of
[Amit Varma]: not a counterpoint exactly, but a further point I'd add is like, I'm a big fan of TikTok. So
[Amit Varma]: number one, people contain multitudes. We'll watch TikTok, read essays, read books, we'll do everything.
[Amit Varma]: The other, I think, trade off that the creators probably face and something that, you know,
[Amit Varma]: everybody sees that short attention span formats like TikTok and all will give you a lot of
[Amit Varma]: numbers. Whereas something like a podcast won't give you those numbers, but will give you far
[Amit Varma]: greater engagement. So you want big numbers with low engagement or small numbers or relatively
[Amit Varma]: small numbers with much higher engagement is something interesting to sort of think about.
[Amit Varma]: So before I go on to the next question, a couple of asides, one aside, you mentioned Gavaskar.
[Amit Varma]: And I remember when I was a cricket journalist in the early 2000s, I called up one of his
[Amit Varma]: teammates, one of the famous quartet. And I was working in Wisden at that time,
[Amit Varma]: so British company and all that. So he actually, his wife, in fact, said, what about Vitamin M?
[Amit Varma]: And then I realized the deep bitterness that people of that generation felt because they were
[Amit Varma]: such great players. But for artists, I think that that lament should not exist because, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I did an excellent episode with Kavita Rao recently, where she spoke about late bloomers,
[Amit Varma]: that, you know, it doesn't matter how old you are, the opportunities are still there.
[Amit Varma]: They are still massive. Now, the other aspect to sort of follow on to my question about artist
[Amit Varma]: slash entrepreneur. Now, the thing is, I was I was on a conference call, a couple of days back
[Amit Varma]: with someone who's building a platform with creator tools and all of that just wanted my
[Amit Varma]: inputs on that. And, and one of the things I realized is that my sense was a lot of the
[Amit Varma]: early friction points for me, once I sorted them out with specialized apps, I don't need anything
[Amit Varma]: else. So I do remote recordings with Squadcast, I'll do all my research and Rome research,
[Amit Varma]: I'll do, you know, once I set up my payment gateways, that is done. And I took care of those
[Amit Varma]: friction points with those specialized points. But there are many things I'm not doing. For example,
[Amit Varma]: and I and most of them I'm not doing because I don't want to, but perhaps that's a rationalization.
[Amit Varma]: For example, one easy thing that I definitely won't do is people come to me and say,
[Amit Varma]: otherwise break it up into half an hour bits or whatever.
[Guest]: I will I will also confess that I said that at the minute I said it, I said, Oh, no. No,
[Amit Varma]: so and my take on that is I understand that. But number one, I think the what's special about the
[Amit Varma]: show is the depth which people love. The second thing is that the moment I start thinking in
[Amit Varma]: terms of even breaking it up into chunks, let's say not a one hour episode, even breaking it up,
[Amit Varma]: then my brain formats a conversation accordingly. Like if I was breaking it up into half an hour
[Amit Varma]: chunks, you and I have already been gabbing for more than an hour. In my mind, I would have had
[Amit Varma]: to format it and say, let's not ramble. Let's get to the point. So the format pushes you into a
[Amit Varma]: certain kind of content. If we were doing only a one hour episode, we wouldn't have had this ramble.
[Amit Varma]: We would have had to, you know, be much crisper. I have the luxury because I don't have the time
[Amit Varma]: limit. So one by compromising there, perhaps my marketing improves. But mentally, it also changes
[Amit Varma]: the content. Therefore, it changes what I do. In a sense, it changes both the art and the artist.
[Guest]: No, so see, again, my counterpoint to that is that I don't want you to do anything with your
[Guest]: process and your core product. Once you have created it, you're giving it to a set of other
[Guest]: creators to say, here's my, here's me. Now, what would you do with it? And I will, I will decide
[Guest]: whether I put it out. So like, for example, at Communion, people come and tell stories, right?
[Guest]: Somebody will come and they will do a story and we will ask them, are you comfortable with us
[Guest]: putting this out? One day, I remember we put up on Father's Day, somebody, one of our young social
[Guest]: media people, put up a story where this girl was talking about a bad relationship, and it wasn't
[Guest]: her own relationship with her father. And this got showcased and below that was this comment about
[Guest]: Father's Day and whatever. And the person wrote to us saying, listen, this is sort of portraying
[Guest]: the fact that I have a bad relationship with my dad, which I do not. And you know, we immediately
[Guest]: took it down. And I and I and I said, guys, you're forgetting the basic, which was that every piece
[Guest]: of content that belongs to someone else should be done once by them to say, are you comfortable with
[Guest]: this? That's an important thing. So I'm saying that, you know, you've created this masterpiece.
[Guest]: Now somebody can look at it and say, you know what, what's the code for the t shirt? And here
[Guest]: it is. And Amit, are you okay with it? And if you say yes, then it's out, then if you don't,
[Guest]: then it's not. Or from this podcast, what is the 30 second clip that we should put on TikTok,
[Guest]: if you want to be on TikTok, so that we can then do a link back to the episode and get you more
[Guest]: listens for the five hours or four hours. That's what I'm talking about. So I don't want to
[Guest]: interfere with your core product. But allow a bunch of people who understand the nuance of
[Guest]: marketing and selling and branding, etc, to build upon it, which is what I mean, Gary V is doing
[Guest]: that I'm the core content really honestly doesn't appeal to me, but I like the process, the way
[Amit Varma]: that he has built that process is exciting. Yeah, no, I think I was sort of coming from the place
[Amit Varma]: where every creator, I think also has to draw a balance between how much they are purely creating
[Amit Varma]: and how much they are being an entrepreneur. And I, you know, and I went out there and became a
[Amit Varma]: bit of an entrepreneur in a sense, because you know, but at the same time, then if you're thinking
[Amit Varma]: about Instagram presence, that takes away mind space, do you really want to do that?
[Guest]: Again, I'm saying you should not do it. You know, that's what I'm saying that I mean,
[Guest]: I'm blessed to have built a team today that when I talk of my, you know, business storytelling
[Guest]: piece, they come back to me saying, we can do this, we can do this, we can do this, we can do
[Guest]: this. And I will pick and choose. Right. And so I believe that I am not now you're right that
[Guest]: somewhere I might have a little bit of, you know, oh, that sounded very nice, maybe next time. So,
[Guest]: the process might get impacted a little, but I try to keep these two things exclusive. And,
[Guest]: you know, and this creator versus entrepreneur debate has defined my life. You know, I mean,
[Guest]: and I must say that, you know, having heard the show so much, one of my internal thoughts was,
[Guest]: where will you slot me? Right? What will you slot me as? Because I have been just a radio jock,
[Guest]: and I have done 11 shows on television, and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, right,
[Guest]: all of that made a film, you know, partly succeeded, partly didn't, or whatever,
[Guest]: all of that has happened as well, built companies, sold companies, which of this is,
[Guest]: where will you slot me? Am I going to be the voice of radio? Am I going to be the first guy on
[Guest]: television who did the roadshows, etc? Am I the first person who saw trends before? What am I,
[Guest]: you know, and, and it's just exciting to know where, and it's that one review you're looking
[Guest]: forward to when you create something saying, what will they say? Right? So that was in my head. And
[Guest]: this creator versus entrepreneur has been my biggest battle, always. Nobody in my family has
[Guest]: ever done a business. My grandfather was a lawyer, very well known, my parents are both teachers,
[Guest]: my sister wrote for journals, and when she was a journalist for a while, then she taught for a bit,
[Guest]: she still teaches, right? I mean, all around me, if I look, there are some doctors, there's a
[Guest]: there's a botanist, there's a scientist, there's, you know, where did this come from? I have no
[Guest]: clue. But this understanding, there's a gap in the market, it needs to be addressed. What will
[Guest]: address it? What's the team needed? Will it scale? What is the investment? What's the risk? My mind
[Guest]: processes things at one side like this. And occasionally, when I apply this to the film
[Guest]: script that I want to write, I'm like, keep this thing out. Don't, and it's very, very difficult.
[Guest]: So there again, I start finding partners. So now I mean, I'm again back on that journey. I'm writing
[Guest]: a film again, I'm writing a couple of shows. And I'm telling you every now and then, no, no, no,
[Guest]: that is not my concern. Then I'm not being true to my creative soul. Then the entrepreneur is
[Guest]: saying, how will it sell? No, you know, I don't want to be the Selu on it. So it's this, that's
[Guest]: what I'm trying very hard to preserve this. And it's fun. I mean, it's a dichotomy, but it's a
[Amit Varma]: good place to be. My approach to slotting is this like, first of all, I have a title for this
[Amit Varma]: episode, but it came up while we were chatting, which is Roshan Abbas and the creator economy.
[Amit Varma]: So that's my title. But otherwise, I don't think about it because I don't want to slot anyone. I
[Amit Varma]: think that's the problem with modern media. Is this a problem with our politics that you slot
[Guest]: everyone? I'll tell you, I'll tell you, you know what used to happen. So I have the joy of having
[Guest]: been with Arnab in college. And he was my junior and I was the captain of the debating team. So in
[Guest]: some strange way, he has always looked on me as being the guy who introduced him in the debating
[Guest]: team and very, very respectful, very loving always. So initially, when he was on Times Now,
[Guest]: if I was called in a debate, I would get two and a half minutes to speak without an interruption.
[Guest]: So it was a rare thing that used to happen. And I used to keep digging and ribbing him on this
[Guest]: thing. One day I was on his panel and there was Ashish Shalhar from the BJP and I was there and
[Guest]: suddenly he turned and said,
[Guest]: Sarkar ka toh yeh aisa karna hota hai. And you know, because I'm a debater, so I said, dekhi yeh hum apki praja nahi hain aur ap raja nahi hain, aap hamare sevak hain.
[Guest]: Right, because he was using that whole analogy of Sarkar and beautiful. And I took off. And one
[Guest]: minute I gave it and everybody was quiet and because I was given the space etc to speak.
[Guest]: Next morning, you know, here come the trolls on Twitter and whatever. And I have these side
[Guest]: conversations with some lovely people. Harsha messaging me saying don't engage so and so saying
[Guest]: mat kar, chhod de, whatever. I said, boss, aaj toh, one of those days when I said, I said, I will take on each of them and I know how to handle them.
[Guest]: And I had three simple ways. The first thing was, go to Pakistan, that's where it started,
[Guest]: because immediately my surname becomes my moniker, right? I'm slotted. And I would start
[Guest]: replying in cliched Hindi because I can speak Hindi better than most of these guys.
[Guest]: Aur Hindi mein type kar raha hu. You know, 80% of them just, they just didn't know how to respond.
[Amit Varma]: Because they'd have to click and then hit the translate this button.
[Guest]: And I'm telling you, whatever I'm saying to them, that why are you here,
[Guest]: the topic you just raised, what you're talking about, what you mean, now they're stuck.
[Guest]: That man, this is something, this should have been answered in Urdu. Number one. Number two, whatever I said, you know, go to Pakistan.
[Guest]: I said, if I go, do you realize that X number of people will lose their livelihoods because I've
[Guest]: given jobs to more than so many people. So I built an economic constituency or whatever.
[Guest]: Again, they would not have an answer because, you know, because they feel that you're dependent on them.
[Guest]: So, you know, these were some of the ways in which I would try and avoid this because,
[Guest]: yeah, slotting is something, sorry, just suddenly triggered from what you said about,
[Guest]: you know, getting slotted and this happening and whatever. So it has happened. And this is where I go.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, you know, we'll talk about social media at length as well. But, you know, people expect my
[Amit Varma]: episodes to be about a particular subject. And I think even if I get a guest who is an expert on
[Amit Varma]: one subject, it doesn't work for me if it's about the subject. You have to have that one-hour
[Amit Varma]: conversation about the person, which we haven't started yet. Kind of. I think I'm going to message
[Guest]: my mom and say, because my parents have come here to say, okay, you guys have dinner today.
[Amit Varma]: Excellent. So let's, let's kind of take a quick commercial break at this point,
[Amit Varma]: and then we'll get to talking about your life after this, which I'm so excited about.
[Amit Varma]: Have you always wanted to be a writer, but never quite gotten down to it? Well, I'd love to help
[Amit Varma]: you. Over the last year, I've enjoyed teaching my online course, the art of clear writing,
[Amit Varma]: and an online community has now sprung up of all my past students. We have workshops,
[Amit Varma]: a newsletter to showcase the work of students, and vibrant interaction with much stimulation.
[Amit Varma]: In the course itself, through four webinars spread out over four weekends,
[Amit Varma]: I share all I know about the craft and practice of clear writing.
[Amit Varma]: I share all I know about the craft and practice of clear writing. There are many exercises,
[Amit Varma]: much interaction, and a lovely and lively community at the end of it. The course costs
[Amit Varma]: rupees 10,000 plus GST, or about $150. And the September classes begin on the fourth of September.
[Amit Varma]: So if you're interested, head on over to register at indiancut.com slash clear writing. That's
[Amit Varma]: indiancut.com slash clear writing. Being a good writer doesn't require God given talent,
[Amit Varma]: just the willingness to work hard and a clear idea of what you need to do to refine your skills.
[Amit Varma]: I can help you.
[Amit Varma]: Welcome back to the scene in the unseen. I'm chatting with Roshan Abbas. And so far,
[Amit Varma]: we were chatting really about the creative economy, which we'll get back to because,
[Amit Varma]: hey, that's what both of us do not just our bread and butter, but safe to say a lifelong
[Amit Varma]: passion as well. But so speaking of lifelong, let's go back to the start. Tell me about your
[Amit Varma]: childhood. You grew up in Lucknow, right? And paint me a picture of those days. Because one
[Amit Varma]: of the things I've realized while doing the show is that, you know, 60% of India is born after
[Amit Varma]: liberalization. A lot of young people today don't have a sense of what life was like. And there were
[Amit Varma]: many good things and bad things and a lot of charm also in growing up the way that you did.
[Amit Varma]: And of course, you know, many of the things kids have today we didn't have like the internet and
[Amit Varma]: access to all the books and movies and music in the world and all of that. But you also had a sort
[Amit Varma]: of a chance to cultivate a Therav as it were, you weren't always rushing from sensation to sensation
[Amit Varma]: chasing the latest dopamine hit. So give me a picture of your childhood. What was it like?
[Guest]: What kind of kid were you? So Lucknow Wow. So Lucknow, you know, by its nature in those days
[Guest]: was always very laid back, right? I mean, I have the standard joke where I say that most people
[Guest]: used to wear white kurta pyjamas because they were too lazy to make a choice, right?
[Guest]: This famous phrase they use about Ganga Jamuni Tehzeeb that it's really a confluence of so many
[Guest]: cultures. There's a small Anglo Indian community, there is a Muslim, Hindu, Sikh, you name it,
[Guest]: I mean, you know, and really, honestly, in those days growing up, I mean, I was born in 1970. And
[Guest]: I remember that everything would be slow and undulating. I mean, my parents were teachers,
[Guest]: we grew up in a very small house in the early days, where we would have to constantly be on
[Guest]: the threat of watching the main road from a window. Because if someone parks their car in front of us,
[Guest]: you know, how will the scooter get out of our house? Because my father out of the fear of
[Guest]: robbery, which never used to happen, but was this thing of placing the scooter inside the house,
[Guest]: you know, so you would. So it was quite crazy. I mean, I remember and my dad was an electrical
[Guest]: engineer, he used to teach electrical engineering in the polytechnic. So he would leave in the
[Guest]: morning and my mom was a secretary in a college in those days, later went on to be a teacher and
[Guest]: a professor, etc. My mom and dad's only ambition was that their children should study in the best
[Guest]: schools. My sister went to Loreto, I went to Lamartinia. Before going to Lamartinia, I was
[Guest]: in this very small school called City Montessori. Sorry, why am I, oh my God, I'll be killed. I was
[Guest]: in Municipal Nursery. And Municipal Nursery had this principal called Popli or whatever and being
[Guest]: four, I mean, I remember being on stage when I was four years old. Right. And we would have these
[Guest]: Jhankis at Janmashtami where I would play the guard who's nodding off to sleep as, you know,
[Guest]: Yashoda is giving young Krishna to be taken, you know, across the river in spate. And I would,
[Guest]: I would play this guard who's nodding off to sleep six times so that you don't let everybody
[Guest]: notices me, you know, because I think it was a little thing early on. Or, you know, you play Ram
[Guest]: in a Diwali thing and, you know, we would, they would do a beautiful thing where they would put
[Guest]: up this whole Ravan and everybody would dress up as, you know, the monkeys and Hanuman and
[Guest]: Vanarasena and somebody would be a Rishi Muni. So it was a fancy dress kind of thing. I was a fair
[Guest]: child and whatever, etc. and reasonably decent in that sense. So I was, I played Ram, I remember.
[Guest]: And therefore, you got to fire the arrow, which actually burnt Ravan. And it was, it was done in
[Guest]: this huge, so I think drama became a very early part of my life. And then at the age of five,
[Guest]: we went to Ravindralaya, which was this slightly imposing auditorium, right? Every city, small
[Guest]: city has this one place where you can, this is the theater. And Ravindralaya, there was an annual day
[Guest]: happening and I was recruited to play this, do this little play, where I was playing this Nawab
[Guest]: and there are two people who are fighting over, is it day or is it night? So one of those stupid
[Guest]: little jokes that you would have found, I mean, nowadays, it would have been a WhatsApp forward
[Guest]: and a two minute kind of thing where I resolve the issue. I went on stage with these two children
[Guest]: after two weeks of rehearsal or three weeks of rehearsal, borrowed my uncle's sherwani,
[Guest]: had a walking stick of my dada, went on stage with a topi, etc. to realize that two other actors
[Guest]: have frozen on seeing such a big audience. Because when you rehearse in school, you rehearse to 10
[Guest]: people and a benevolent teacher. Now you've got an auditorium, lights in your face, 1000 people
[Guest]: looking at you and these two kids froze. And I said, before my grand moment on stage, these two
[Guest]: guys, I mean, they'll bring the curtain down. And actually, we were in interlude before the next
[Guest]: performance. So we were in front of the curtain. So they just put off the spot and that's the end
[Guest]: of being in the spotlight. And I said, seize the day. I told both the kids what their lines were
[Guest]: saying. Aap shayad yeh kehna chah rahe the, you know, and I gave them one guy. And I had five,
[Guest]: yeah. I did that and I told the other guy saying aur aapko gussa isli aara hai and I gave them both
[Guest]: their lines so I could get my grand moment on stage. Did it, got a lot of applause, went off
[Guest]: stage and our theatre teacher and I still have that picture somewhere in one of those old black
[Guest]: and white albums. And he hugged me in front of my parents. He said, is ladke ne meri izzat rakli.
[Guest]: But you know, more than that, is that that moment on stage of seizing that moment and
[Guest]: controlling that thing had just stuck with me. And by the time I moved to La Martinia,
[Guest]: which really became the school where I did from prep all the way till class 12. La Martinia had
[Guest]: this culture of obviously, there would be a set of kids who would go to, you know,
[Guest]: science and engineers and IIT wale bachche. Then there was a second category which was
[Guest]: army mein jaane wale bachche, air force mein jaane wale bachche. We had a big tradition of the army.
[Guest]: I mean, we were one of the schools which has military honours, not for the right reasons,
[Guest]: because we, because the kids helped in the mutiny in 1857. So there were British battle honours and
[Guest]: stuff. But again, when I try to explain La Martinia to people, it's difficult because it's
[Guest]: Hogwarts. It's a palace. It was built by Claude Martin, who used to actually sell things to the
[Guest]: Nawab in those days. He was a brilliant, you know, merchant as well as a soldier. And if you read
[Guest]: some of the books on him, they're fascinating. And he built, you know, a palace that actually
[Guest]: looked like an amalgamation of some things he saw in Egypt and some things that he saw somewhere.
[Guest]: So you'll have Sphinx right on top. And then you'll have some angels and it's crazy, but it's
[Guest]: beautiful. And it's across, I don't know how many acres of land. There's a golf course on the,
[Guest]: you know, in La Martinia. So space was always there. You know, in fact, when I come to Bombay,
[Guest]: etc., sometimes the space just gets to me because humein aadat thi wo undulating lawns aur ghaas
[Guest]: pe letne ki, etc. So that was one part of life. The other part was that because both my parents
[Guest]: were working, they were very clear in the early days that dekho, school jao, padhai karo, kuch
[Guest]: aur karna chahate ho, extracurriculars karo aur ghar aajao. And the extracurriculars from very early
[Guest]: became my imagining. I mean, that was my amusement park. That was the place that I thrived. So I
[Guest]: would take part in everything, Amit. I would be in the Hindi elocution and the English elocution,
[Guest]: the debate in Hindi, the debate in English, the dramatics in Hindi, the dramatics in English,
[Guest]: the quizzing team, the just a minute, the music, name it. The only thing I couldn't do is sport.
[Guest]: I tried very hard. I was failed when I tried to, when I went on to the football field. And I had
[Guest]: this funny teacher who told everybody, Baga, this boy, he's a brilliant, brilliant, brilliant
[Guest]: footballer. I had never played football before. But I had a good looking kit, which my parents
[Guest]: had given me. And I went on to the field and I had only seen stuff on in newspapers, television
[Guest]: and not come, I think, because this is pre-82, before we know it. And I thought every ball has
[Guest]: to be headed. So the ball used to come near me on the ground, I would be, they thought I'd kill
[Guest]: myself by the end of it. So I was a failed footballer. Then I got a hockey stick, tried to
[Guest]: get on to the thing, missed the ball every time. So I would just keep holding the hockey in a really
[Guest]: fun manner. So after these two tries, I said, you know, I'm best at commentary. So I would go and
[Guest]: sit on the side and give, you know, aur ab dekhi team hai aisa kar rahi hai, aur dusi taraf se
[Guest]: team prahar karte hua aa rahi hai. And we were used to radio commentary, right? I mean, in those
[Guest]: days, aur dekhi Zafar Iqbal leh game jo hai, wo chala, aise, aise, you know, those lives were
[Guest]: just incredible. And the way radio, radio commentators and the way they used to explain
[Guest]: these things was wonderful. I got a little fascinated with radio, my mother and father
[Guest]: used to occasionally go on radio and do those little talks, you know, I mean, morning show,
[Guest]: etc. And my dada used to call me Mirza Tolphod because I used to want to, I used to want to
[Guest]: get to the bottom of everything. Yeh TV ke andar kya hone wala hai, iske andar kya hone wala hai,
[Guest]: radio ke peeche kya hai. So I was fascinated and I went to the radio station. And the minute I
[Guest]: went to the radio station, I realized that wow, again, you know, there was a mic and there were
[Guest]: people. And this gentleman who used to hear every Sunday was now a live person sitting in front of
[Guest]: me. So a little bit of a fascination with public speaking and theatre started right there. The
[Guest]: other thing about Lucknow was that I think somewhere I was this energizer bunny who was,
[Guest]: you know, who used to keep doing things, while everyone else was really laid back. Like there
[Guest]: are friends of mine in Lucknow, if I go to their house, and they ask you for a cup of chai, right?
[Guest]: So you're sitting in their turn and say, chai pee ho gaye? You say, of course. Ab aadha ganta
[Guest]: nikal gaya hai, chai nahi aayi. Toh once I turned to my friend, I said, Faisal yaar yeh kya hai yaar,
[Guest]: chai kyu nahi aayi? Toh he says, aawaz raise kaun karega? Jab wo saamne se aayenge, toh poosh
[Guest]: lenge. So you know, it's a very, and I keep telling these people these stories so that they understand
[Guest]: where we come from. Arguments are not encouraged. Aap yeh nahi bolenge ke aapko thand lag rahi
[Guest]: hai. Aap bolenge, yaar, pankha tohda tez chal raha hai. You know? And then you turn to the person
[Guest]: and say, aapko nahi lag raha hai? So you will not turn and say, make the fan slow. So like my
[Guest]: wife's biggest problem would be sometimes saying, why can't you be direct? But Lucknow mein na yeh
[Amit Varma]: op, yeh Passive-aggressive hai yeh.
[Guest]: No, no, no. And it used to happen is keh, keh gomti jis tariqe se aise undulate karti hui
[Guest]: shehar ke through nikal jati thi, hum logon ki baate bhi aise hi nikal jati hai. We're not going to
[Guest]: confront the issue right up front, etc. We'll dot I's, we'll cross our T's, tehzeeb tamiz, all of
[Guest]: this. And then in the midst of all that was the joy of great food. And even see the food in also
[Guest]: Lucknow, koi cheez tez nahi banti hai, koi cheez jaldi nahi banti. Kebab jo banta hai, wo overnight
[Guest]: banta hai. Theke pehle uspe masala lagta hai, phir usko dhundara jaata hai, it's smoked. Then it is
[Guest]: cooked. Nihari must be cooked for 24 hours, right? The whole thing about dampukht cooking. I mean,
[Guest]: I don't know whether you know the story behind how dampukht cooking actually when it started.
[Guest]: So it was incredible that apparently there was a Nawab who had lost his teeth. So they said the
[Guest]: food needs to be so soft that it should melt in his mouth. And so the Kakori kebab, which is so
[Guest]: famous, became famous because the recipe was ke yaar yeh mooh mein gal jaata hai. Galouti kebab, galne war, galouti. Kakori.
[Guest]: These are all kebabs that were created as a cuisine so that the Nawab would not have to use his mouth
[Guest]: because there were no teeth. So see everything is a lazy, I mean, lazy loving solutions to life, I think
[Guest]: was what Lucknow was about if I was trying to paraphrase it all. But that's what happened. And in
[Guest]: the midst of this is Energizer Mani. Energizer Mani wants to do everything. Sab karna hai. The other
[Guest]: thing is that for a family where knowledge means a lot, awards mean a lot, prizes mean a lot. And
[Guest]: you know, I was winning prizes from prep onwards. All those prizes in Lamartnia when you could go
[Guest]: and buy books. Because of parents being teachers, a huge little library at home. My mother was in
[Guest]: fact doing her BA when I was very small. So I keep telling people saying, imagine your bedtime
[Guest]: stories was Midsummer's Night's Dream. My mother used to read that to us because she was preparing
[Guest]: for her exams. Or she was talking about, you know, her history papers. So I knew more at the age of
[Guest]: eight, I knew about Axis and Allies and who came and who was what and Luftwaffe and whatever because
[Guest]: that's what she was reading. So I somewhere feel that a lot of this fascination with books and
[Guest]: knowledge started happening. Hamare ghar se 200 meter, 300 meter door ek Ameer-ud-Daulah library
[Guest]: thi. Nam bhi dekhe Ameer-ud-Daulah. Right. So while it's the name of a person, but it was this
[Guest]: thing that, see, this is richness. And it had these really imposing steps. And I keep telling
[Guest]: people, I often do this in schools when I go and speak and I say, you type a word in Google,
[Guest]: we used to have to climb these steps, meet a librarian who would give us attention when he
[Guest]: wanted, because he was the only person new kitab kaha rakhi hai. There were five floors of books,
[Guest]: hidden under layers of dust. Once I tried to find a book, I came back, I think looking like
[Guest]: ancient Indian history because I mean, you were just covered with dust. And I can still smell that
[Guest]: dust. I mean, somewhere at times I can smell that dust because when you found a book, it was finding
[Guest]: a treasure. And therefore, this thing about knowledge being a treasure, which then gave you
[Guest]: victory and awards and the ability to win. And, you know, the wealth of knowledge versus the
[Guest]: wealth of material gain was such a big thing in our family. My parents didn't care about money,
[Guest]: they cared about this. And so this fascination with winning prizes, again, became a big thing
[Guest]: for me. Obviously, for a young boy, it puts you in the spotlight, you're always there,
[Guest]: you're always climbing the stairs, seven times on, you know, on prize day, and your parents are
[Guest]: looking at you with pride. It's wonderful. But you were still sequestered to all this is fine.
[Guest]: And I loved biology. I even today, if I could, I would want to find this book called
[Guest]: A Functional Approach to Biology by M. B. V. Roberts. While everyone was reading Dignam and
[Guest]: Nigam and all these books, I wanted to read this because it was in the British Council Library.
[Guest]: And this book was fascinating because it suddenly took the human body and said,
[Guest]: you know, there are three kinds of, you know, body forms, all plants and all animals come from
[Guest]: a functional approach. They all come from a stem from a cell. And that cell has evolved. And I was
[Guest]: obsessed with this theory. And I would keep writing this in all my exams and keep getting
[Guest]: bad marks in bio in my 11th and 12th because they wanted me to study. So I would want to question
[Guest]: what was written. And because I was in the debating team, and I was the debating captain
[Guest]: and everything, I love doing all of that. So interschool meets had started, we were traveling
[Guest]: outside of school. And I had this wonderful teacher who unfortunately passed away during
[Guest]: COVID, Mr. Elton D'Souza. In class eight, he discovered me as a young boy, and I started acting
[Guest]: in the school plays. And he became a mentor and a guide. And Elton, really, I mean, your parents,
[Guest]: parents at home, and there's always a teacher who's a parent in school. Elton was that for me,
[Guest]: there were there were a lot of other teachers, but Elton built a joy for me for literature,
[Guest]: for theater. We did plays. I remember we did Mousetrap in my final year when you're passing
[Guest]: out Agatha Christie's Mousetrap. And I was playing the key character, you know,
[Guest]: Detective Sergeant Trotter. And even our prizes were so beautiful. So the prize in school for
[Guest]: the best actor was called the Metro Golden Mirror Award for the best actor. And because it was
[Guest]: instituted by MGM. I don't know how, but it was an MGM award. So you know, the fascination with
[Guest]: winning that. So and I'd won it before or whatever. And in the 12th, I said, this is the ultimate
[Guest]: culmination. I remember taking part and they didn't give me the prize and they gave it to someone else
[Guest]: and my mother was most upset. Why didn't I get it? So Elton came and said, he said, because this
[Guest]: rascal turned the play upside down. He started from page 11 and then went to page this and he
[Guest]: said, you should have seen the other actors. They were they were meant to be stricken by this thing
[Guest]: of who will die next. They were stricken by which line will come next. So I just kept laughing and
[Guest]: I would do this. I was I would very good with, you know, speaking extempore, off the cuff doing
[Guest]: things. And in the midst of all this, I think we were carving out our own little space. And I say
[Guest]: we because my family's this whole thing about knowledge being what we were the wealth of
[Guest]: knowledge. You know, I often say this thing, don't mistake self-worth with net worth, because the
[Guest]: self-worth came from all of these things. And you love this, the attention. My mom once told me that
[Guest]: there was some, you know, the normal Lucknow trader families. And, you know,
[Guest]: one of the ladies once came to my house and apparently told my mother saying, you know,
[Guest]: I'm not sending my kid, what if he gets spoiled, you know, so very protective in that sense,
[Guest]: parents. But this fascination for biology, this thing about questioning the norm, this love for
[Guest]: theater, suddenly in class 11 took me to this point of sitting with my parents and saying,
[Guest]: you know what, I can dissect a frog beautifully, but it doesn't clap. Right? I said, and when I
[Guest]: crack one line on stage, I look at the whites of the people's eyes in front of me, and it's a
[Guest]: drug. It's so exciting. So can I do that instead of this? And my parents who had built these things
[Guest]: off, and my aunt was a very well known doctor, and she'd gone to Riyadh, made a lot of money,
[Guest]: made a big name. So everybody's thinking this is the road to Abbas success. And I saw them
[Guest]: over chai in the evening, and they just turned and said, my dad got up, he opened his Godrej
[Guest]: steel Almera, which had three locks, remember the first lock, then the side lock, then the inner
[Guest]: lock. And on the inner lock, he took out his passbook. And he came very dramatically showed
[Guest]: me his passbook and said, beta, this is the money I have saved us four lakhs. I remember he said that
[Guest]: on maturity, this will be four lakhs, two lakhs is for you, two is for your sister. Whatever you
[Guest]: want to do in two lakhs, you can do. But main bada khuddaar aadmi hoon, main ne zindagi mein
[Guest]: jo kuch kamayi se, my dad said, I've never taken a bribe. I've never tried to make money the wrong
[Guest]: way. So beta, this is all I have. And I have kept this aside for your education. I don't even know
[Guest]: whether this would have got you a merit seat in CPMT. Yes, without money. But if I had to buy a
[Guest]: seat, I couldn't have done it. So this is the extent of play I can give you. This is the extent
[Guest]: to which I can stretch the tarpaulin, the trampoline for you to jump on. If you expect two
[Guest]: lakh and one rupee, main nahi karunga. If you expect that you'll come back with a great idea and say,
[Guest]: you know, dad, I need 10,000 to invest in this and make a crore, main nahi karunga. So hearing this,
[Guest]: I realized the gravity of the situation. At the same time, I realized the freedom I was being
[Guest]: given. And this I keep telling people is saying that give yourself goals and deadlines. Give
[Guest]: yourself denominators to be able to judge on. This, you know, just having a numerator on top
[Guest]: se nahi hota hai. What is the yardstick of measurement? What is it that you're going to say
[Guest]: this and no more? So I came to Delhi with this fascination and saying that I've flown the coop.
[Guest]: I've left Lucknow and come to Delhi. And you know, you won't believe my parents were like,
[Guest]: go and do it yourself. And not with a, jao, we're abandoning you. You know, it's no, it was,
[Guest]: we have so much faith in you, you'll do this on your own. And I went with one attachee,
[Guest]: two khaki trousers from school. I, you know, fashion in Lucknow was kurta pajama.
[Guest]: Toh ek jeans thi jo ke bahuti fashionable mujhe lagta tha hai. Ek grey pant tha, which was horrible
[Amit Varma]: now that I think about it. You still have the grey pant? No, I don't. You know, I wish I did.
[Guest]: You know, I had one jacket, which one girl had taken off me in college because I was in the band
[Guest]: and she wanted the singer's jacket. It was a short lived affair, which I realized was actually,
[Guest]: all she wanted was the jacket. But anyways, so I came to Delhi. And I got into college,
[Guest]: I went to St. Stephen's, I had 79.6 as my aggregate because I really screwed up biology.
[Guest]: And I'd gotten 92 in my 10th grade. So I mean, suddenly it was a big drop as well. So suddenly,
[Guest]: there was this one story in Lucknow saying the boy has gone the wrong way. You know,
[Guest]: barbaad ho gaya ladka. But my parents were not, they were telling me one thing, he'll figure. So
[Guest]: that confidence came to Delhi, didn't get into Stephen's, cut off was 80. Somebody said, arre,
[Guest]: pull laga lete, sauce laga lete. I said yaar mujhe pata hi nahi hai kya hota hai.
[Guest]: Main road cross kara, Hindu college tha, saamne gaya, JP Kakaria was our teacher. He went in and
[Guest]: see the minute I'm with a person, I know how to engage them. So I sat with him and I told him
[Guest]: two stories of Lucknow, etc. And he smiled and he says, well, you don't make the first list cut off,
[Guest]: but I think with extra curriculars, we can get you in and I got it. Didn't get the hostel,
[Guest]: went and stayed with my aunt in Pusa road used to keep coming back. Sorry, you asked me about
[Amit Varma]: Lucknow. I moved to Delhi. I hope that's fine. Oh my god, he said Lucknow and I'm in Delhi already.
[Amit Varma]: Actually, let's come back to this later. I want to go back to Lucknow for a moment.
[Amit Varma]: One, your stories are so resonant for me because you know, my father also spoke about how when he
[Amit Varma]: was in college in Calcutta in the early 1960s, whatever exams he would top and all of that,
[Amit Varma]: books multiply. Like you'd get a set of books, he'd go to the bookseller, he'd be like, I already
[Amit Varma]: have these because I won it last semester, give me another set of books. And that same sort of
[Amit Varma]: love for knowledge and all of that is there. We also had those Godrej Almiras at home.
[Amit Varma]: And my father used to keep them one particular Almira, one particular thing was locked.
[Amit Varma]: So I was a curious kid. So one day when my parents had gone out, I took the key and I
[Amit Varma]: kind of opened it. And there was one copy of Playboy and one copy of Mayfair.
[Amit Varma]: These were two sort of, Mayfair was a similar magazine to Playboy and those physical products,
[Amit Varma]: of course, don't exist. But this is just to give a picture that it was so hard to see.
[Guest]: There was, I'll tell you what, I'll give you my example. So we had a library in college and
[Guest]: the boys, the senior boys, so you were in class eight, which is when you sort of just discovering
[Guest]: all this, right? And the senior boys would always go to one corner and say, Nick Carter, Nick Carter.
[Guest]: Nick Carter was the CIA operator, which was created as a book, as a, you know, answer to
[Guest]: James Bond, right? And the difference between James Bond was in James Bond, everything was
[Guest]: suggestive, you know, they went into the room and he and she, there was a zipper and zip and that's
[Guest]: it. Nick Carter had two pages of steamy sex. So I would realize that all the boys would go and get
[Guest]: the Nick Carter and the librarian would sit there saying, whoever would take a Nick Carter, she would
[Guest]: give them that look of, I know what you guys are up to, right? So I remember the first time I went
[Guest]: and I asked for it, I felt so embarrassed. But my dad, just again, like, you know, my dad realized
[Guest]: that, oh, this is the age. So Debonair aati thi, yaar. So one day I found next to my bed a Debonair
[Guest]: lying. My dad was saying, beta, it's time. I was telling him the other day, why did you just have
[Guest]: a chat about the birds and the bees? And I know, but my dad is very quiet, very shy. Also, I think
[Guest]: a big introvert that way, you know, so I'm an exact opposite. But it's that, you know, that he
[Guest]: that I knew that he wanted to tell me something. I was like, I'll figure it. So I figured it,
[Guest]: you know, through friends playboys and in exchange of Commando comics for something else. And,
[Guest]: you know, again, the joy of early discovery. So like, you know, like, I sometimes say,
[Guest]: I read Ayn Rand in college, I said, I read her in class eight. Right. And I was so impressed,
[Guest]: I thought, that's life. You know, Howard Roark, you know, John Galt. Oh, God, even now, I mean,
[Guest]: I when I was doing up my house just now in Dubai, I was like, can I get a couple of originals? Can I
[Guest]: get one of those quotes from Ayn Rand? So it's still a residue. But you know, people have seen
[Guest]: Tarzan comics, I have read Edgar Rice Burroughs. And it's, you know, while it if you read it now,
[Guest]: you realize there's a whole thing about, you know, race and color, but it was so vividly written,
[Guest]: you know, Wilbur Spitt, you know, Agatha Christie, I mean, and you know, these are early things or
[Guest]: whatever that you have is writings. And then slowly my dad was reading Osho. So I was reading a
[Guest]: little bit of the Rajneesh stuff. And then there was a lot of I remember Bertrand Russell, you
[Guest]: know, so you suddenly got these diametric and then my mother's history books in the middle of all
[Guest]: this. Akbar, you know, Ayn-e-Akbari, because when and she would read these out to us. So it was such
[Guest]: a rich environment. Yeah, you know, and mujhe ab bada ek tape recorder tha, my father would get
[Guest]: these ghazal cassettes, right and Mukhaddar ka Sikandar ka audio tape. Aur phir Sikandar aage
[Guest]: bada aur and one dialogue Zorabai. It was fascinating. You'd listen to Modi ke matwale
[Guest]: rahi. So when I hear podcast today, when I hear mantra, I look back and I say, you know,
[Guest]: this is Inspector Eagle of that time. It's just being narrowcasted. It's just being done. And
[Guest]: they're still keeping that radio ethos because I mean, radio plays still have that though America
[Guest]: has obviously figured a way in between. Par wohi ho raha hai, you know, medium batal gaya hai,
[Guest]: cheezein wohi hain, Hawa Mahal hota tha, Modi ke matwale rahi, Inspector Eagle. There was one
[Guest]: adalat which used to happen, which then became Aapki Adalat. And I see them just move from
[Guest]: medium to medium. But that was what what was happening in Lucknow in those days.
[Amit Varma]: So let me let me ask you a question about your parents. Like at one point, you've spoken about
[Amit Varma]: how your dad was into calligraphy, he was into the arts, he was into poetry. And yet he had to do a
[Amit Varma]: job. He had kids, woh responsibility aa gayi. Even your mom at one point stopped studying, took up a
[Amit Varma]: job. Because job karna hai, bachche hai. And you just said earlier that the kids were everything
[Amit Varma]: for them. Your father used to cycle 11 kilometers to his workplace, you've said. He had a moped.
[Guest]: He had a moped. So moped pe jaate the and early days me cycle pe jaate the, you're right. In the
[Amit Varma]: early early days, he used to go on the cycle. Yeah, and all to get you into a good school and
[Amit Varma]: all of that. And it's very sad in a sense that people even creators, I mean, they were the,
[Amit Varma]: perhaps you could call your dad a creator of that age. But there's no, there's no possibility of
[Guest]: doing anything more. So you know, and Amit, you know, I'll tell you, so my dad, everything he did,
[Guest]: the books that he's written, I mean, this is his 11th book that he's just released a couple of
[Guest]: weeks ago. And it's all about history and lost monuments and calligraphy and influences. But
[Guest]: he could not do this because so my dad told me that beta the reason I let you do it. And the
[Guest]: other day, we were talking to a doctor and doctor said, Mr. Abbas, how did you let your son do this
[Guest]: in Lucknow in those days? He said, because I could not do it. And you know, and I and for that
[Guest]: moment, it was such a big moment for me when I heard that saying that, because he was my dad
[Guest]: loved Shirey and all this stuff. But his dad said, dad was a judge and dad was being himself,
[Guest]: he was saying, the boss is safe, safe, electrical engineering. So my dad actually went to AMU
[Guest]: studied. And the the story is that when he sat for his final exam, he was so angry with his father,
[Guest]: that he filled all the correct answers and then scratch them all out. So instead of giving him
[Guest]: a degree, they said he's given all the right answers, but he scratched them out. So how do
[Guest]: we discipline this boy? So they gave him a diploma instead of a degree. And he didn't contest it. And
[Guest]: then he came back and said, with a diploma, what can I get? And he got the job of a lecturer.
[Guest]: Otherwise, he could have been I mean, imagine what what trajectory in life would have gone.
[Guest]: But he took that my mother wanted to be a doctor, but stuck back because of us. But you know, then
[Guest]: made the most of this whole thing. So I think they really gave both my sister and me like my sister
[Guest]: was doing cookery things and this and oh, what do you want to do you want to learn the guitar,
[Guest]: learn this, you want to do this, do this. They really gave us as much as they could. And
[Guest]: somewhere that for me, it became a bigger thing of saying, responsibility and payback and I've
[Guest]: got to achieve etc. You know, when people don't say, you know, both constraints as constraints
[Guest]: can be good. But yeah, they were the early creators. True. No, and one very sort of moving
[Amit Varma]: story is how when you were 30, your father was 62. And he said to you, is it okay? Do you need
[Amit Varma]: me to work? And you told him, obviously, I don't exactly and he's written some 1112 books since
[Guest]: then, in fact, because that's what set him you know, and I know, and it's such a touching thing.
[Guest]: So this happened. So first thing was, and I said, because I was doing really well at that point in
[Guest]: time. Then he contacted me and says, beta, can you give me some money? I said, my dad asking me for
[Guest]: money and you know, and with my family, I keep telling this, everything I have is yours, you can
[Guest]: tomorrow say you want it all, it's yours. So I said, dad, what are you asking me? And I suddenly
[Guest]: said, in my head, sitting in Bombay, my dad's telling me he wants some money. My mind my brain
[Guest]: is saying, okay, he must be wanting 25 lakhs, whatever, etc. That's how my mind started. And
[Guest]: then I said, 25 lakhs is not enough, it must be 2 lakhs. So I said, what do you want it for? So
[Guest]: he says, listen, there's a mosque nearby, which I which I pass, it's derelict, it's really old.
[Guest]: It's owned by the Waqf Board, but it's come to ruin. There is a man who has lost his job because
[Guest]: he used to do the Urdu calligraphy before the evening news on Doordarshan, Lucknow Doordarshan.
[Guest]: So, you know, they used to do translations in Urdu, English and whatever. So his job was to do
[Guest]: the Urdu calligraphy. He's lost his job because they're no longer promoting any of that. The
[Guest]: calligraphy in this mosque is really bad. I believe that if I employed him for a period of three
[Guest]: months, he says I can do this. Now again, you know, see Bombay, okay, okay, must be a couple
[Guest]: of lakhs or whatever. I said, how much do you need? He says, 25,000. And I said, you're asking
[Guest]: me? I said, again, I said, dad, it's your money. And you believe you me? Because you know, mama
[Guest]: has put your money, I mean, our money in savings and FD whatever, etc. I didn't for a second bat
[Guest]: an eyelid. And you know what happened? He gave that money to this man who felt that he was who
[Guest]: is to get 5000 rupees a month, mind you, and therefore for him, this was five months of salary.
[Guest]: And he happily went and took paint and did up this thing. And suddenly the mosque started looking
[Guest]: beautiful from the calligraphy viewpoint. The Waqf Board people came and said, look at us,
[Guest]: we have not been able to do anything. This one man has done this. The least we can do is put
[Guest]: electricity and fix the walls. They did that. Somebody came and said, oh, but now this needs
[Guest]: a carpet. And suddenly from a ruin, it became a running mosque. And this for me was saying,
[Guest]: it takes little effort sometimes to start a revolution, but somebody needs to start.
[Guest]: And again, I think that's something which I take from him. And even today, like, I mean,
[Guest]: if we go on vacations, and we as in my mom, my dad and me, no one else, because I'm like,
[Guest]: no, this is my space. Every year from 2015, one year, they went to Iran, etc, on their own.
[Guest]: But, you know, every year we go on this one vacation. And I tell my dad, where do you want to
[Guest]: go? And he will pick Uzbekistan. Why? No, because you know, I want to trace where the Mughal family
[Guest]: actually came from. And where are we going? I've never even heard of. But it's such a fascinating
[Guest]: and I become a child again, because I go there. I'm a parent to my parents at that moment,
[Guest]: because I'm guiding them and holding them and making sure they're safe and whatever.
[Guest]: And then you know, when I see my dad run upstairs, like a child to take a picture of something.
[Guest]: I just I mean, it's nothing can be more heartening. And we've done Turkey and we've
[Guest]: done Uzbekistan and London where my mother every day would go with him. And my mother diligently
[Guest]: her heart is, you know, stuck in my dad in every way. So he wants to go to the British library.
[Guest]: My mother's behind, and she's finding the book and he's sitting there. And then my dad will like
[Guest]: a little and like I'm telling you like a child, do you think I can buy this book? And I said,
[Guest]: you can buy them all. And he's like, no, no, I only want this one. So like his suitcases when
[Guest]: they come back from holidays have nothing, not a single cloth, not a single item of he buys
[Guest]: miniatures, because the shelves at home were very small. So he would buy only miniatures in the
[Guest]: early days. But we've got such beautiful miniatures from everywhere, a ballet dancer, a little
[Guest]: dancer, a little Russian doll, all of these. And then there are books and books. And now there are
[Guest]: these encyclopedic books because you know, he'll find the Islamic calligraphy from here and buy it
[Amit Varma]: and but it's just such a joy to do these things. Yeah. Yeah. And I let my listeners know that you
[Amit Varma]: should pick up Confluence of Cultures by Saeed Anwar Abbas. That's your dad. And it's got 256
[Amit Varma]: photographs taken by himself. This is just so inspiring to see. He's 82 now. Exactly. You see
[Guest]: someone do this kind of work. And three trips to Gujarat because he said, no, I want to show
[Guest]: how many cultures are influenced by the monuments in Gujarat. Why do people want to share them?
[Guest]: And my father makes these statements in his own way. And I love that because like, and he grew
[Guest]: up in those early days in Lucknow, when there used to be Shia-Sunni riots. So he always, he was
[Guest]: quite an atheist himself. And at one point said, okay, I'm an agnostic. Let me at least not argue.
[Guest]: Because people used to say, Abbas, don't argue. Because when you argue, our faith gets damaged.
[Guest]: Because he would ask them questions like, so what is God and where is God and all of these,
[Guest]: you know, a little Javed Akhtar about it in that sense. But I love that. Even today, I love that,
[Amit Varma]: you know. But it's, yeah, it's damn inspiring. Like, like Kavita Rao was on my show was telling
[Amit Varma]: me her mother learned Sitar at 75 and now plays it. It's beautiful. And it's like, you know,
[Amit Varma]: we young people, relatively young, should have no excuses. Thank you for that. That is such a good
[Guest]: big compliment. Because young is nowadays this thing which I'm saying. So what is young?
[Guest]: I think in this context, I can say we young people.
[Amit Varma]: To move on to my next question. Now, one of the interesting things you said about yourself as a
[Amit Varma]: child was that you like to get to the bottom of everything. So obviously, we don't have TV,
[Amit Varma]: so we don't watch that much football. We're playing with our heads. But otherwise get to
[Amit Varma]: the bottom of everything. Now, this also strikes a chord with me because whenever I learn something
[Amit Varma]: new, I don't just want to randomly imitate things which are happening. I want to get meta, I want
[Amit Varma]: to get to the heart of it, basic core principles. And what was that journey like for you? Because
[Amit Varma]: you've gotten into, for example, acting, what makes a good actor? Is that something you think
[Amit Varma]: about? What makes a good debater? And at a time when there aren't books or YouTube videos that
[Amit Varma]: deal with just these subjects, I'm assuming, you have to figure out a lot of it yourself,
[Amit Varma]: you have to build your own base. What was that process like where one, you perform because you
[Amit Varma]: love performing, you're a natural performer. But two, then you start thinking about this stuff.
[Amit Varma]: And how does that work? For example, how would your conception of an actor have evolved over
[Amit Varma]: the years, where initially what you see on the big screen is just Bollywood style performative
[Amit Varma]: stuff, which is also what, you know, theatre would be more projection and performing, I'm guessing?
[Guest]: No, it wasn't. So this was what was the unique thing because English theatre, which Elton used
[Guest]: to do was very, very British in its, you know, because he had seen some VHS tapes and his house
[Guest]: in the in the college used to have a shelf, which I had access to, not many students had,
[Guest]: which had all his play scripts. And therefore, we would sit every afternoon with lunch at his home.
[Guest]: And his mother used to make the best, you know, meat, which was like, you know, in those days,
[Guest]: you could have beef tongue and all of these things. And she would make this and that and
[Guest]: chicken and whatever. And we would go for the meal and stay, of course, for the literature,
[Guest]: because it was fun. But we would read plays, we would just 10 people sitting together and reading
[Guest]: and doing it in the manner that it needed to be done. So Elton was not about, you know,
[Guest]: overdoing it or whatever. He was such a wonderful person. And I mean, I can talk hours and hours
[Guest]: on him because he was the person who'd enter class and, you know, look at a child who was
[Guest]: misbehaving and say out out brief candle. And then, you know, we would have this discussion
[Guest]: on Shakespeare and Macbeth. And, you know, we would sit for two hours and discuss why
[Amit Varma]: Duncan's blood was golden. Except brief candle has missed it because he's out of the class.
[Guest]: Brief candle nikal gaya. And that love again, for knowledge, the joy made it and you know,
[Guest]: Lucknow in those days, there was this streak of sameness. And I often use this line in many
[Guest]: places where I say, avoid the sea of sameness, because conformity was so cool. It was so easy.
[Guest]: Why are you? So I remember when I used to go to the old Muslim colony of chalk,
[Guest]: where we had some relatives, the younger kids would, you know, would take jibes at me and my
[Guest]: sister because we would talk in English and Hindi and Urdu as a mix. So they would turn and say,
[Guest]: because, you know, we would turn and say and this and that and whatever, you know,
[Guest]: so and to shantoo and to shantoo. But my parents would turn and say, listen, it's jealousy. It's
[Guest]: don't don't think that you're not fitting in and now you need to fit in. And they were very
[Guest]: protective of us. So there would be these big families normally which would descend on you and
[Guest]: all summers and my dad would be like, listen, itne din theek hai, lekin after this, I want to take my
[Guest]: children on a holiday. I mean, the museums used to take us to or the movies, Sunday mornings were
[Guest]: for an English movie that we would see. Hum pe Bollywood ka influence, the film that I remember
[Guest]: watching the three or four films was Sholay, you know, because obviously it was a classic at that
[Guest]: time. Satte pe Satta, because I just loved the comedy. And then my dad would say, this is actually
[Guest]: Seven Brides for Seven Brothers. Have you seen that? So he would build that entire thing behind
[Guest]: Bridge on the River Kwai. So, you know, hum yeh dekh rahe the, hum nahi dekh rahe the, hum gaman
[Guest]: dekh rahe the, because my father was so fond of these, hum Umrao jaan dekh rahe the, hum junoon
[Guest]: dekh rahe the. Like I remember, I was in love with Nafis Ali when I met him. I was like, oh my god,
[Guest]: you know, what all can I tell you about, you know what I mean? Because my dad took us to see Junoon.
[Guest]: And that talked of, it was set in Lucknow. Delhi and Lucknow, I think,
[Guest]: haan, Lucknow tha because there was a bit of. And you would have been like 9, 10 at the time.
[Guest]: Yeah, yeah, absolutely. You know, and going to Sholay because, you know, and we're watching that
[Guest]: and you're being told about what is it referencing from a Western point of view. I mean, there's so
[Guest]: many Western film influences in that, right? If you look at it, I can break it up into Sergi
[Guest]: Leone part one, this, this here, plus this, right? And great script and great dialogue, etc. But it's
[Guest]: all of that. So, when you have this kind of discussion, toh wo nahi tha. Stage acting with Elton
[Guest]: was, was very measured. When I came to Delhi, I, you know, got into Aamir Hussain's theatre group,
[Guest]: Stage Door. And that was, of course, a completely different world. But then, Delhi was professional
[Guest]: theatre. People were paying. So, you couldn't now come and do, you know, era-gera stuff. So,
[Guest]: now you were rehearsing for months on end, etc. And so, theatre, many people think acting is about,
[Guest]: oh, it's a flair. At the core, it's discipline. It's the discipline of turning up. It's the
[Guest]: discipline of rehearsal. It's the discipline of knowing that you could have a two-line role. My
[Guest]: director, I mean, Aamir was the man who took me from, in my second play, I was his beloved boy,
[Guest]: you know. And I went out and, you know, had a drink with a couple of my
[Guest]: friends and ended up at rehearsal, a little high. And for Aamir, who was this devout Shia in Delhi,
[Guest]: seeing that this bunch of boys has come, and he, of course, blamed the senior boy the most,
[Guest]: but he chucked us all out. I was playing the lead. I think we were doing 10 little Indians,
[Guest]: as it was called, because the original name, as you know, now it's very unparliamentary and,
[Guest]: you know, whatever. So, we were doing that and I was going to play the lead character. And suddenly,
[Guest]: overnight, I was demoted to a, I don't even think, you know, Narikot has a, he just comes in and
[Guest]: says, I bought the supplies, I think. That's it. So, from the lead to this. And, you know,
[Guest]: for two weeks, I'm traveling from Delhi University, changing two buses, traveling for two hours to
[Guest]: come for a rehearsal for four hours where I have to say one line and then just stand. But it was
[Guest]: testing that, are you going to stick with it? And that, I think, that process, you know, this quick
[Guest]: fame issue, which again, see, I have this one little theory, as you can see, but it's like,
[Guest]: boss, do it. Keep doing it. I mean, the other day I turned and said, because I guess there are lots
[Guest]: of people I come across in my industry who are really loud and really talk about what they've
[Guest]: done. And, you know, even if they've not done enough, they will talk about it 110.
[Guest]: So, that day, sometimes I do it, I do it subtly. So, I turned and said, you know, it's better to
[Guest]: be a river because, you know, you can be quiet, but you will get the job done. But do it, do it
[Guest]: do it, do it quietly. You don't need to blow it out of proportion, which I see so much of in our
[Guest]: industry. And I actually, I'm still a little careful about saying, I don't want to ruffle
[Guest]: too many feathers at times. But one day when I will write a little bit of a expose of many things,
[Guest]: but I really want to put it out there saying, man, there's so much shit that is shoveled
[Guest]: everywhere. And people love it. And they don't know the core behind it.
[Amit Varma]: I can't wait for your memoir. Whenever it happens, kindly, this is the first podcast you come on to.
[Amit Varma]: So, going back to the question about learning, like, how does one learn?
[Guest]: Sorry, I completely missed that. I'm sorry. So, I'll tell you, one is, I'm a note taker like you.
[Guest]: Now I've started transcribing, right? So, that day when I was doing it, because it's so much
[Guest]: that I don't know what to do. And now there's technology available. But I used to take notes.
[Guest]: If I did a debate, I remember in the first debate, I said something, and I was in class
[Guest]: four. And so, you had a senior speaker, a middle school speaker and a junior speaker.
[Guest]: So, I had to do it. So, I went. My dad had written my speech for three pages. And my dad had told me
[Guest]: very quietly after the speech, saying, Roshan, talk about this topic. I said, I've already done it.
[Guest]: And I went there. And I remember the topic, beauty lies in the eye of the beholder,
[Guest]: a typical school topic, right? And then the senior students spoke, and I decided I'm going
[Guest]: to rebut the senior school students, you know, with my question saying, you know, if you think
[Guest]: beauty doesn't lie in the eyes of the beholder, what do you want? A beautiful pancreas? Stupid,
[Guest]: bloody, ridiculous, for class four, please excuse me. And you know, I could see a couple of sniggers
[Guest]: and whatever and I got off and then somebody asked me some question and I didn't have an answer.
[Guest]: And I went that day and my dad said, see beta, a little knowledge is a dangerous thing.
[Guest]: Don't make sweeping statements. If you can discuss it, then discuss it to the core.
[Guest]: And I think that stayed with me. So I now started taking notes on anything.
[Guest]: So for me, if you were doing comedy, I didn't just want to know about what's the play, but I
[Guest]: wanted to know, is this the Italian tradition of Commedia dell'arte? Is this this? Is that?
[Guest]: And that seeking would continue and this would then create a process. When I set up the event
[Guest]: company, even for a couple of years and at somewhere along the line, it became a digital
[Guest]: book and it's somewhere there. But I had a black book of mistakes that we used to make in every
[Guest]: show. And that's why Encompass became known for its culture and creativity, because we'd say,
[Guest]: these are the mistakes we made. These are 10 more. This is the list. So the list would just keep
[Guest]: continuing and adding up. So I think finding the process. So for example, like in acting,
[Guest]: so stage acting became to me about the discipline of first learning your lines.
[Guest]: So like when I do theater with people sometimes and I've tried to tell them about the process,
[Guest]: like the first thing we were taught was that don't emote a single line.
[Guest]: When you when it becomes rote memory, then add things to it.
[Guest]: Now what happens is we will read the first line and immediately add an expression to it. And what
[Guest]: happens is this becomes, you know, memory, it gets imprinted in your brain. And if you don't
[Guest]: do that action, and the director changes that action, you will realize you'll falter at that
[Guest]: point. My simplest way of learning I did Aladdin a couple of years ago, and I played Jafar and,
[Guest]: you know, it was just a whim that I wanted to do a musical. I couldn't remember my lines. And I
[Guest]: went back and I said, what was the first rule? The rule was, read the script, read it aloud,
[Guest]: read it to someone else. Now, write the script, write every dialogue. Where I used to stop is
[Guest]: where you'd stop, where you'd forget, and then I would write it. And after three times, when you
[Guest]: would cross that moment, this was the best way of learning your lines. Then I will never if you put
[Guest]: me on stage 20 years later for an Aladdin show, I won't forget. I did My Fair Lady, I remember
[Guest]: everything, I can go start now and go, because this was a process that you learned. So I would
[Guest]: break things down into these processes. Even now I keep trying to do that. Now I do that with
[Guest]: business sometimes, or I'm fascinated when Satyanshu does his script writing, and I attended
[Guest]: one of the brilliant classes I attended during the pandemic. And then Commune started promoting
[Guest]: that because I said, this is a great screenwriting course, he knows his material, he's passionate
[Guest]: about it. The techniques he taught, I have noted them all down. Now when I write my film, I write
[Guest]: it according to that. I go to Satyanshu and say, Satyanshu, is this a good idea? Can I take your
[Guest]: time? I'm happy to pay. And like, he'll be like, you know, we've got a great relationship going.
[Guest]: He says, no, sir, you don't need to do it. I said, no, but it's something that you get paid for.
[Guest]: I'm willing to pay for your knowledge. If you wanted to go to a charity, I'm fine.
[Guest]: But you have to regard and respect someone's time, and then if a process is made, it's made. And again, like, see, I'm telling you,
[Guest]: when I come up with this whole thing, I keep talking about intimacy at scale, you are the
[Guest]: person I put at the center of it and said, how does this economy get defined? And I promised
[Guest]: you, when you attended the podcasting day, my heart says, that's the day when you said, so many people
[Guest]: are talking shit here. Okay, I will do my own podcast. It might have been the trigger saying,
[Guest]: boss, what are they saying? A lot of people are coming here and sharing knowledge. But the truth is, I have done this.
[Guest]: I've lived this experience for four years. Let me tell you. Right. And that's what happens.
[Guest]: So I know what you have built. And then it's come out of that. I want to know your process. I want
[Guest]: to document it and put it down somewhere saying, okay, so this is how this circle of intimacy and
[Guest]: this economy is built. There's a friend of mine who's currently working on how in Zoom,
[Guest]: he said, see, what's happening is the audience gets lost. Right. So everybody in the chat gets
[Guest]: lost. Now, he is an AI machine learning kind of person. He said, you know, the tool I'm building
[Guest]: is going to analyze chats in any software and be able to intelligently give the person conducting
[Guest]: the event data. So imagine you're conducting your cohort and you keep it really small. But imagine
[Guest]: you were doing a concert of 500 people. And you suddenly turned and said, where are you going to
[Guest]: said, where are you all from? And the AI will pick all the answers and tell you, hey, Amit,
[Guest]: 80% of people are from South India. Now, will that help you? You decide. So it's like a prompter in
[Guest]: your in your head. Now, I am fascinated by this thing, the process of making chat, not invisible,
[Guest]: but visible. We call it between us. I mean, he said it, I think, first thing, the economy of
[Guest]: recognition. Right? Can you recognize the person and see the what YouTube does superfan, right,
[Guest]: tick tock, pay extra tokens. So first, you need to be able to call that person out in your chat,
[Guest]: right? Now, could you do that if tomorrow you started doing a 10,000 people cause one day and
[Guest]: said one day only. But in the chat, you're able to suddenly turn and say and all the people from
[Guest]: Mirzapur. And they're like, how does he know, but that process that intelligence. So I keep I mean,
[Guest]: I keep trying to put these little formulae up every now and then I experiment with them and
[Amit Varma]: I see what happens. No AI is mind blowing. I mean, in fact, we're talking about the golden
[Amit Varma]: age of creators, which I believe is upon us. But who knows 20 years later, there may be no golden
[Amit Varma]: age of creators because AI is creating everything. So here's my next question. Before we get back to
[Amit Varma]: your, you know, time in Delhi, one sort of question that struck me when you spoke about
[Amit Varma]: discipline. Now many years back, I'd come across this interview, which I cite sometimes because I
[Amit Varma]: think this particular insight really hit me hard at that point, where a great sportsman was asked
[Amit Varma]: about talent. And he said that, you know what talent is? Like people will think sporting talent,
[Amit Varma]: hand-eye coordination, body SEF, fast twitch muscles, whatever, all of those things. He said,
[Amit Varma]: you know what talent is? Talent is you've been getting up every day in the morning at six to go
[Amit Varma]: running. And one day you get up at six and your whole body is tired and it's raining outside and
[Amit Varma]: you're like, shit, it's Sunday today, I'll sleep. But you still get up and you still go and run in
[Amit Varma]: the rain. And that's talent. And that really struck me because just now you said creativity
[Amit Varma]: is not that there are feelings inside, but it's discipline. It's, you know, getting your ass on
[Amit Varma]: that chair and just work, work, work, like you pointed out the way you learned the lines of
[Amit Varma]: Aladdin that, you know, you read it, you write it, you put in all of that hard work. And it's
[Amit Varma]: kind of sad that many talented people I know, like when I look back in the 90s, when I, you know,
[Amit Varma]: I started my working life and I think of people I thought were talented then, and so many of them
[Amit Varma]: haven't done anything and people I thought weren't talented then, but they just worked hard because
[Amit Varma]: it's constant iteration. I tell all my participants of my writing course that you have to exercise
[Amit Varma]: your writing muscle. If you join a gym, you can't build your muscles by gaining an intellectual
[Guest]: understanding. You know, there's that, there's that cliched one, but you know, these work well
[Guest]: in some places, but a diamond is a piece of coal that's stuck to its job. Point is just that, you
[Guest]: know, this friend of mine wanted many years ago, when he was starting Commune, he wanted to do a
[Guest]: comedy show and he was going through this whole thing, I wanted to do comedy with it or whatever,
[Guest]: etc. I said, you know what you do? Just announce the date. I said, announce the date. Satyanshu
[Guest]: says the same thing. He says, jab mujhe kuchh naya karna hota hai, main Twitter pe jaake uski
[Guest]: date announce kar deta hu. Ab karna hi hai. You know, and how we did, when we did Spoken, I mean,
[Guest]: sorry, I keep jumping all over the place, but you know, Spoken Fest, when it happened, it was,
[Guest]: I announced the date. Ab announce kar diya, boss, 17th October ko hona hai. My team said,
[Guest]: how do we do it? We've got no sponsor. I said, ho jayega yaar, kar do. When you put that pin in
[Guest]: the ground or whatever, etc. Jhanda gaad diya hai, toh phir tujhe build karna hi hai, toh karo.
[Guest]: And these are simple hacks for creators, you know, because as I said, creators hide behind so many
[Guest]: walls of layers of insecurity, misinformation, this whole thing of people keeping you away from
[Guest]: the truth, right? Nobody guiding you. All the points you said in that evening, those five,
[Guest]: you know, things that you said, absolutely. But people have made a business out of distancing
[Guest]: you from those, right? A strange anecdote of us. We used to work with Ronnie Shruvala and Zarina
[Guest]: when they were running Bindas and Hungama as channels. And for Hungama, which was meant to
[Guest]: be a kid's channel, we came up with this idea called Captain's Hunt. And Zarina was very astute.
[Guest]: So she said, listen, every child in school wants to be a captain, only one person becomes a school
[Guest]: captain. For the channel, we will have 10 school, 10 captains of the channel, who will decide the
[Guest]: programming. I said, brilliant idea, boss. You know, great campaign, great marketing campaign,
[Guest]: for me as Encompass, great on-ground activation. Now, Purnendu was, if I remember, Purnendu boss
[Guest]: was the CEO of Hungama. And he turned to me and said, you must do print. I said,
[Guest]: koi bacha print se nahi aata. He said, no, no, you know, kids and whatever. I said, see,
[Guest]: no kid reads a newspaper. NIE forces people to read in some senses, nobody reads it.
[Guest]: So he said, no, no, but you know, and somebody came and obviously sold him a media plan,
[Guest]: which had so many hoardings and so much this and whatever. I said, I'll tell you what,
[Guest]: I said on the hoarding and the newspaper, put a PO box. And let's see how many entries the PO box
[Guest]: gets. I am telling you, because I will go to school and I will enter a classroom and I will
[Guest]: tell 100 kids to fill a form, and all 100 will fill the form, I will get you 30,000 entries
[Guest]: for this price. And this media plan will get you. So how many entries? I said, I'll tell you,
[Guest]: you will get less than 10. And everybody said, what bullshit? You know, if there was a smart
[Guest]: media planner, he would have told 50 families to fill them and send them so that I would get beaten.
[Guest]: There was one entry filled by Purnendu's child. He told me later, he said, Roshan,
[Guest]: that one entry is my child. So you know, you have to, yeh log samajhte nahi hai, you know,
[Guest]: half the time, yeh hi ho jata hai, you are sold so many of these supposed truths. You have to
[Guest]: break through, you have to go and take the challenges. Aise nahi, aise karo, aise nahi,
[Guest]: aise karo. And I think that's somewhere where you just keep experimenting and pushing that barrier,
[Amit Varma]: that boundary a little further. No, and you know, again, continuing on that tangent,
[Amit Varma]: what I find in media today is a lot of people, it's a brave new world, but they'll get settled
[Amit Varma]: in a way of doing things and they'll tick boxes. Ki iska Instagram presence hona chahiye, Facebook
[Amit Varma]: pe yeh campaign karenge, yeh karenge, woh karenge. You know, Ambi Parmeswaran was on the show,
[Amit Varma]: many weeks ago, and he used the phrase, spray and pray for digital marketing. And I find ki
[Guest]: wahi hai, bahut, bahut, matlab, aisa hi hai. I'm sure he said that thing about, you know,
[Guest]: 50% of advertising works, you don't know which half, right? These are those classics that you
[Guest]: know. But genuinely, this thing of what do I love about Varun, for example, I work so closely with
[Guest]: him. I mean, I've mentored the team in some way, but I mean, he's constantly trying new things.
[Guest]: He tried one podcast and it didn't work, tried another, did something. Kar raha hai na. And I
[Guest]: know where he's building it towards or whatever, etc. You know, or a whole bunch of people that I
[Guest]: work with, this is what I love that, you know, that they are constantly innovating, they are
[Guest]: scared of that sea of sameness. Of course, occasionally, all of us get that imposter
[Guest]: syndrome of, you know, do I know enough? Am I really the right person or whatever?
[Amit Varma]: I think creators tend to both underestimate what they can do in terms of their work and
[Amit Varma]: overestimate how much it will get them in the short term. So I think you just have to throw
[Guest]: things at the wall like Varun is doing. Sameer Bangara, I mean, God rest his soul. I mean,
[Guest]: he was running Kyuki and doing a wonderful job. And I remember a stage presentation where he
[Guest]: turned and said that, you know, and in those days, he was talking about being a creator in
[Guest]: the early days. And I think this is about six years ago. And he said that this is not a sprint,
[Guest]: it's a marathon. Yeh samajh lo. And again, see, this is something that just stuck with me.
[Guest]: Saying that bilkul sahi baat hai. You know, I have not so far killed the podcast game because
[Guest]: I did a season of one thing and I said, do I really want to ask more questions in this line?
[Guest]: You know, so what do we do now for me was, how do I solve the pandemic? How do I solve the
[Guest]: pandemic? For creators, for doctors, for so and so. After eight topics, I said yaar yeh thoda ab
[Guest]: answers same aa rahe hain sabke. Toh main ya toh either I find a new twist to it or whatever. So
[Guest]: I said no nahi karna. Or like, you know, when we did this whole thing about goodnight stories for
[Guest]: adults. What were we saying? So my team said, you have a great dramatic voice. You modulate really
[Guest]: well. You've done it so long. People used to love that about you on radio at one point. Let's try
[Guest]: that. Humne kara. The other day I got a bunch of people when I was doing a Q&A on Instagram and
[Guest]: said, where is the next story? I said, okay, kuch toh hai. Maybe. And then I asked a whole bunch of
[Guest]: stories, okay, what stories work? And these are a little, I mean, I have to use your word, meta
[Guest]: stories. I said, dekho ismein wo dramatic arc nahi hai jo honi chahiye gahani ki. Chalo yaar
[Guest]: try karte hain. Chalo try karte hain. So we did it. But I'm now veering towards something on the
[Guest]: creator economy as a podcast. I said, yaar yeh mera domain hai, mujhe bahut keela ispe. I can connect
[Guest]: to anybody in the world. Thankfully that network today is, I can call somebody in the US, I can
[Guest]: call somebody in Egypt, in Arabia, here, kahan, kahin pe. And dost bhi hain. So maybe this is the
[Guest]: space. You know, maybe this is where, this is one which I can crack. But jab tak crack nahi kara
[Guest]: hain, wo try karte raho, lekin lagge raho. I can't give up on this now. You know, I want to do it.
[Guest]: I'm like, okay, theek hai. You can, thankfully it allows you the thing of pause, start again,
[Guest]: do something new. Should it be an interview? Should it be two people? Hindi mein ho,
[Guest]: Angrezi mein ho. Sometimes you get caught in this problem of also saying that because of this
[Guest]: language thing, sometimes they get a little, you know, divided on, oh, Hindi is the easier one to
[Guest]: do because it has a larger reach. And Hindi mein itni nahi hai abhi. But dekhte hain. I don't know.
[Amit Varma]: So here's a question. On the one hand, the advice is so many things at the world.
[Amit Varma]: On the other hand, it's also useful to not pay too much attention to metrics, to just keep trying
[Amit Varma]: to do something till you become really good at it. Now, for a person like you and very specific,
[Amit Varma]: for you, you have a sea of things that you can do. How do you decide ki kya karna hai,
[Amit Varma]: kya nahi karna hai? Because money is no longer an issue. So how do you now decide ki yeh karna
[Amit Varma]: hai, yeh karna hai, yeh karna hai, baaki sab nahi karna hai? Because in your 20s, you're possibly
[Amit Varma]: in a phase where, like you said, you're saying yes more than no. And the world is opening up.
[Amit Varma]: Today, I'm guessing you have to say no more than yes.
[Guest]: No, you know, so I'll tell you what I do. I quickly divide things into saying, are these
[Guest]: things that I need to do as an individual? Or do I need to do them as a collective or as an
[Guest]: entrepreneur? Those that I need to do as an entrepreneur, very often I see it as businesses.
[Guest]: I'm a venture capitalist in a small way. I'm an angel investor. I invest in tons of things. And
[Guest]: frankly, I have now got a person who's just there to take care of what all investments we have,
[Guest]: because sometimes, isme toh humara bhi kuch paisa laga hai. Yeh situation aagayi hai. Par
[Guest]: main, because main usko paise ki usse interest nahi karta hoon. I keep saying that I live a dream
[Guest]: through someone else. It's my job now to say, how can I help you? Right? I put aside a little bit
[Guest]: of time. I also don't bullshit them. I say, I can help you tell your story better. I can help you
[Guest]: connect you to good people in media. I can get you an X number of things. These are the things I can
[Guest]: do for you. Product kya hona chahiye? Maybe I can help you a little bit in terms of the look and
[Guest]: feel. But beyond that, don't come to me with AI shayay. Mujhe nahi pata. So don't come to me with
[Guest]: all of that or whatever. Sales cycle kya hoti? Mujhe nahi pata. So I'll tell you what to do there.
[Guest]: The things that I am very passionate about and I want to be more involved with are my ventures. So
[Guest]: there is, you know, Kalakaksh, which is a very small Hindi, not Hindi only, I would say Indic
[Guest]: language focused creator space, where we are promoting only spoken word artists, etc. But
[Guest]: we're trying to do it, focus more on the Indic languages because I believe regional will be a
[Guest]: big push. Who will get there? Who knows? Commune, right? Because again, I think it's coming life
[Guest]: coming full circle. I mean, I got on stage and that stage gave me life. Can I give that stage
[Guest]: to everybody else for their life? I think that is somewhere the hypothesis that is deep inside me on
[Guest]: that. Now there are two personal goals, right? I believe that there is a film in me and there are a
[Guest]: couple of scripts in me. I have now found, I believe in Satyanshu and one or two other people
[Guest]: that I know, good sounding boards for my ideas. I now want to like a good student work, deliver,
[Guest]: and not make an earlier mistake of servicing someone rather than servicing my creativity.
[Guest]: Right, which is a mistake that I have made. And I made it at events earlier at some time. And I
[Guest]: said there, I made it saying, it's your show, do what you want. But when I did it with a film,
[Guest]: I just realized a little too late that the name of the title is yours. Right? That's it. You have
[Guest]: to acknowledge it and own it and say, this is my work. 100% my work. I can't put a subtitle,
[Guest]: you know, Amit said, put this scene very well. Quentin Tarantino said, when I go to set,
[Guest]: I have to be, you worship at the altar of Quentin Tarantino. I used to think it's such a selfish
[Guest]: statement, what an egoistic statement. But the truth is that on set, and I realized this in an
[Guest]: Indian film set and any film set, everybody there from the gaffer, to the makeup person to the
[Guest]: cinematographer actually wants to make a film. You're the one person given the opportunity to
[Guest]: make it. God forbid, you suddenly open it up for democratization. But I really thought that
[Guest]: filmmaking is, what can we do? Everybody would have an opinion. You would be given a flood of
[Guest]: ideas. And that's when you've actually got to say, no, I've heard everyone, this is how it needs to
[Guest]: be done. But don't end up servicing someone else's creativity when it's an individual project. And
[Guest]: because I also at some level, you have this whole, try and be selfless about something,
[Guest]: then this conflict happens that should I, can I be selfish about this? Can I really do this? So
[Guest]: one thing, of course, is that I definitely want to put some piece of content out there, because
[Guest]: when I put the book out there, and it did decently in terms of speechless, Amazon bestseller,
[Guest]: it's not a huge thing. But I know public speaking, I know how to get an audience on stage,
[Guest]: and I was sick of hearing people who went on stage and said, this show is magnanimous.
[Guest]: And I'm like, what are you saying, buddy? That's not, and a client saying this and whatever,
[Guest]: now become usage. So you look at hosts, it's a tragedy that many of them believe they're there
[Guest]: for their looks rather than, then, you know, what on the day when the makeup man is not there? What
[Guest]: on the day when the dress doesn't look so good? What on the day when you put 20 kilos on and
[Guest]: whatever? Is your mind, you know, being able to say enough? So I was solving something. So I did
[Guest]: the book, and it was a personal project, right? And I believe that, okay, it's something that
[Guest]: is going to be there, hopefully for digital posterity. And I think at some point in life,
[Guest]: as a creator, you yearn to create something that everyone remembers, right?
[Guest]: Digital Aether mein itna ban raha hai, Amit ki kaunsi ek podcast hai? Like, I would love to know,
[Guest]: which is that one episode that you say, you know, everything else will die, but this will remain,
[Guest]: right? So I'm looking for that one piece that can have Roshan Abbas on it and live for posterity.
[Guest]: You know, we went to Mars and people would still turn and say that, you know, this was a great
[Guest]: thing that he did. And I guess legacy and these are these are other issues that always come with
[Guest]: maybe with age and with time. I was appalled and my son said the other day that, I'm not here for
[Guest]: a long time, I'm here for a good time. And I heard it and I said, he's a 19 year old kid. And I
[Guest]: followed it up and I said, why do you say that? He said, I'm so disappointed with your generation.
[Guest]: And I was like, Oh, God. He said, look at the world that we're living in, right? Will we survive
[Guest]: more than 20 years? What I mean, you want me to think of earning a livelihood, when I maybe just,
[Guest]: I mean, I've got a couple of years and whatever. And what happened? One of my friends said,
[Guest]: all of us said this, do you remember? You also said this at a time I said, maybe maybe I don't
[Guest]: remember now. But this thing of, you know, for him, it's the short, for me right now, it's the,
[Guest]: you know, the long, it's the scene in the unseen. So I'll quickly address one hypothetical question
[Amit Varma]: that you brought up, what episode will I remember? I think, you know, I actually don't have any
[Amit Varma]: favorites. I don't have any favorite kids. There are some that I remember fondly, but those are
[Amit Varma]: probably 30-40 episodes, it's a lot. And the reason for that is that I just put myself in
[Amit Varma]: every episode. And then once it's done, I don't look back. I just keep kind of moving forward.
[Amit Varma]: Which brings me to my next question that one of the pieces of advice that I give young creators
[Amit Varma]: and that I have tried to make my credo is be authentic to yourself. Okay, because what is the
[Amit Varma]: gap in the market, what does the audience want, all that is fine. But out of the 7 billion people
[Amit Varma]: on this planet, the only thing you have, which no one else does, is you yourself. And this is also
[Amit Varma]: what you've pointed out, that I will make a film now, so I will worship at the altar of Roshan
[Amit Varma]: Abbas. That's what you're going to do. Now, how has that sort of evolved? Because initially,
[Amit Varma]: when you start, you are doing a lot of gigs, you are doing assignments, you are being a host at
[Amit Varma]: this event. A lot of that is, you're playing a role, you're playing the role that you're expected
[Amit Varma]: to play. First of all, when we talk about authentic to myself, that obviously just the definition of
[Amit Varma]: that must be changing with time. Like when you're young, what is your dream? What is the ultimate
[Amit Varma]: thing? What is the ultimate thing? How has that evolved? And what are the things, therefore,
[Guest]: that in your career, you hold special? So, I think, initially, when I came to Delhi and,
[Guest]: you know, my breakthrough to radio was one of, I mean, again, it's one of the things that I often
[Guest]: talk about and saying that I was this Mastercom student who came out and my graphics teacher,
[Guest]: Mr. Rajeev Lochan, turned to me, turned to the entire class at the last day and he said,
[Guest]: he had his card and he should give us the card. He says, I used to laugh a lot when he used to
[Guest]: talk. He said, we said, so-and-so film director. He said, you'll have to prove yourself. And I said,
[Guest]: you know, he's right. Because we believe in the two years that we are here that Shah Rukh Khan
[Guest]: you have now got to pay your dues. We were told again at film school saying that two years do all
[Guest]: the mistakes you can because you're doing it on our dime. When you do it on someone else's dime
[Guest]: and their time boss, it will cost you. So, I came out and it hit me for six months in terms of
[Guest]: saying I just wasn't getting the right job. And I came out of Mastercom and I married a classmate
[Guest]: of mine, you know. So, suddenly there was this thing of I have to earn that 10,000 rupees. And
[Guest]: my parents were like saying, listen, you can love someone. Don't need to marry right now. But you
[Guest]: know, love and youth and everything else in between. And I said, no, no, I have to do it.
[Guest]: Now, with that, I suddenly had this number in my head and the means to reach it. So,
[Guest]: Usha Albuquerque signed me for a television show for Zee called Hum Hoge Kamyab.
[Guest]: Paying me two and a half thousand rupees a episode, four episodes a month, 10,000 is done.
[Guest]: But the first day when I went on set,
[Guest]: I was given a Hindi script. And I still remember the first line of it.
[Guest]: Stapati kala mein snatak prapt karne ke liye, yadi aap. Now, look at that, right? Kiski
[Guest]: samajh mein aayega? But Usha was being true to the fact that the show is for Zee. It's meant to be in
[Guest]: Hindi. So, she took a Doordarshan writer and said, script lik do. Usne lik di. After doing those lines,
[Guest]: I kept hesitating, faltering, because I was having to learn them. And then I stopped and said,
[Guest]: guys, this is not me. Ne, ne, beta karlo, beta karlo, beta karlo. Maine chaar episode kari. At
[Guest]: the fourth episode, I ran off to Lucknow. Again, I said, non-confrontational. So, bhaage kaise?
[Guest]: Toh bhaag gaye. Bhaage. Went there and I called and I said, this is not me. She says, you know
[Guest]: what you're doing? You're destroying your career. I said, but this is not me. And it tells me every
[Guest]: time I go on set, they make me dress up in those fancy clothes and stand in these places and talk
[Guest]: about, you know, giving people a way to be kamyab. Main khud toh na kamyab hota ja raho na. So,
[Guest]: main kaise kar sakta hoon? And I just walked out. And everybody said, how can? This was your
[Guest]: 10,000 goal. I said, but it was not my authentic goal. So, I gave it up. Now, what am I doing? I
[Guest]: go to Aamir Azad Sir, my theatre director. I worked with him for two months. Theatre discipline,
[Guest]: at the end of two months, you're given an envelope. You don't know, usme 500 rupee hain ke kya hain.
[Guest]: And I ended up with a thousand rupees. And I said, but this man is aware that I need 10,000
[Guest]: rupees. I've said it so many times to him in so many ways. I still took it saying, no,
[Guest]: theatre will make me big. The third month, I got a gig to host in Lucknow, which was a fashion show.
[Guest]: 5000 rupees for one night. Now, I made a choice. You're not committed to theatre. And I said,
[Guest]: no, I'm not committed to theatre. I don't want to do this or whatever, etc. Ye iski audience bhi
[Guest]: choti hain. Main aapko khush karta hoon. Oh, you know, you're turning your back on the medium that
[Guest]: made you. I said, maybe. And I took that call. I mean, unfortunately, Aamir and I went our own
[Guest]: ways after that and tried once or twice to get together, but it just became too much of a fault
[Guest]: line. Went to Lucknow, did the show, came back, was on stage in that thing. And again, I said,
[Guest]: this I do really well. But there were not so many live events. So I came back after that little
[Guest]: money. And I said, now what do I do? Switched on the radio one evening, 50 rupees in my pocket
[Guest]: left, you know, very scared of what I'm going to do. Will I ask my parents for money? And I heard
[Guest]: a jazz music show. The minute I heard it, and the song got over. And I now forget because he played
[Guest]: a villain in one Hindi film. And you know, he was he was a theatre actor from Bombay. Therefore,
[Guest]: he had that clipped accent and everything. And he did this whole thing of the next piece that you're
[Guest]: going to hear is about so and so. And you know, you can make out that condescending tone. And it
[Guest]: just riled me. I said, yaar, itni achi music baja rahe ho. Usse pehle jo banda baja rahe hai,
[Guest]: wo All India Radio ka wo hai. Aur Dehna Bhaiyon, dekhe aapka ag lagana jo aapke saamne bhi aa gaya
[Guest]: hai. And I'm like, yaar, yeh banda iski tone galat hai. Wo banda teacher ban gaya hai. And
[Guest]: mujhe itna gussa aaya that agar itna gussa aaye toh karo. Thanda mat karo, gusse ko thanda mat
[Guest]: karo. Let the pressure cooker let off steam. And the steam was, I have to go and change this. And
[Guest]: the next morning I took my SD bike, went to All India Radio, stood outside. Now I had to do all
[Guest]: the jhol I'd learnt in theatre. And theatre, you know, from painting the set to bribing the person
[Guest]: to get permission, sab kuch humne kiya tha. Toh yeh saari cheezein jo kari thi, unki wajah se
[Guest]: mere ko learning thi. So I got into All India Radio. And again, I say this so many times, I'm
[Guest]: saying, most of these big places have got these fancy doors which keep you out because they're
[Guest]: so imposing, right? I mean, castles, etc. I've got. And All India Radio and Dulshan, if you ever
[Guest]: go, has got the same thing, right? Massive doors. But sometimes the key to that door is with the
[Guest]: most smallest person, which was the gate guy. And I observed him for 10 minutes while he told
[Guest]: everyone, kaan se aayo? Kya leke aayo? Kisse milna hai? Kept chucking. Like, line hi lagi hoti thi
[Guest]: All India Radio me jaanne ke liye because this was the medium, right? Gatekeepers to these mediums
[Guest]: of broadcast. I watched him for 10 minutes. Yeh kabhi toh break lega. Aur main uski baatein
[Guest]: saari sun raha tha side se. Main chai ki tapri pe gaya. The guy came there. And as he came there,
[Guest]: I said, bhaiya, do chai dena. And I turned to him, I said, aap lehenge? Dekho, Hindustan mein
[Guest]: chai ko koi refuse nahi karta. Agar coffee peene wala aaj ho toh baat doosri hai. Par chai,
[Guest]: coffee mein, I tell people, kabhi mat refuse karna. Kam se kam 10 minute to saamne wale ko
[Guest]: aap baat karni hai. So the minute I gave him, it's a peace offering. It's a conversation starter.
[Guest]: And usko chai di, kaan se aayo? Now, he started. I said, bhaiya, main originally Lucknow se hoon,
[Guest]: Delhi mein padho raha hoon, Mass Communication padho raha hoon. Acha, Mass Communication,
[Guest]: yahaan par humare jo FM mein hai, wo bhi wahi se hai. And I didn't know that. I said, acha,
[Guest]: kya padhate hain? Because I had already passed out. He said, haan, haan, unhan abhi wahaan par
[Guest]: padhana churu kara hai, whatever. Pachey aate hain unke yahaan pe. Acha, tum kyu aaye ho?
[Guest]: Main khad, main bhi FM walo ko jaanna chahata hoon. Arrey, main le chalta hoon. You know?
[Guest]: And this is, somebody said this about Anand Mahindra. They were saying that if you want
[Guest]: to get to Anand Mahindra, why not get to know the liftman of the building and say,
[Guest]: what time does he come every morning? Rather than try to seek an appointment with his secretary.
[Guest]: And I went in and I told this guy there, saying, I want to do a radio show. And he laughed at me,
[Guest]: saying, you're coming into All India Radio and saying, I love FM, your jockeys suck,
[Guest]: but I can do a better show. And this was my pitch. And I said, really? I mean,
[Guest]: I think he must be laughing at my audacity of saying that. And he called Linda Mukherjee,
[Guest]: who was the Assistant Stationary. Linda, look at what this young boy is saying or whatever,
[Guest]: et cetera. Dono khade hoon hain, main unko, ab main, I've got the door entry, ab main kar loonga.
[Guest]: And I said, sir, you know, I loved Indian music and my dad did this and I love ghazals and I love
[Guest]: that and whatever. So I was giving them, I can do all of these things. I was opening up my box of
[Guest]: wares. I said, what do we have a slot? They said, yeah, Sunday we have a slot 10 to 11.
[Guest]: What show will you do? I said, mere show ka naam hoga 10 se 11. He said, stop joking. 10 se 11,
[Guest]: that's the time. I said, no, no, no. And now I'm thinking on the fly, saying,
[Guest]: 10 gaane honge aaj ke, it'll be like a countdown, ek gaana hoga purana to show you what is timeless
[Guest]: and I'll string this with interviews. Kaan se laoge interviews? Aisa main kar loonga.
[Guest]: And over that, this was Friday and he said, you know, he must have just thought
[Guest]: Thursday and Sunday is the slot. So I've got Friday, Saturday to prepare. He says, okay,
[Guest]: let's try him out. Now you've given me the opportunity. And see again, this is my medium,
[Guest]: talking to people, getting them comfortable, getting them to speak. And I went to every
[Guest]: paan shop because that was where the conversations and music used to happen.
[Guest]: I said, bhaiya log kya kharid rahe hain? Kaunse gaana chal raha hai? And a year later when I did
[Guest]: television par public demand, it's nothing more than what I did on this first radio show.
[Guest]: So I know now as a creator, I am great with conversation. I've come up with a format.
[Guest]: I went in, I did that first radio show. When it got over, there was a man standing outside saying,
[Guest]: aapko station head ne bula hai. I said, lag gayi yaar. But kar toh liya. Good show.
[Guest]: And you know, Mr. Khanna, I remember was the station head and he called me and he says,
[Guest]: and you know, these are moments you remember. He says, you've got a gift.
[Guest]: He says, tum kisi se connect kar sakte ho, chahe wo raddi wala ho, redi wala ho, ya raees ho.
[Guest]: This was his line. But you know that he could be a merchant, a rich man or a guy who's selling
[Amit Varma]: raddi over there. And he alliterated in Hindi. Can you imagine Hindi? And I think also,
[Guest]: I mean, that was the way people used to talk. Aap radio bachayi hai, aaj bhi log aise aap se
[Guest]: baat karenge. Toh usne yeh bola mujhse. And he turned to me and he said, yeh mat bhoolna. And
[Guest]: then jaate jaate hi gave me that thing of saying, yeh maine na Ameen Saini mein dekhi the.
[Guest]: I mean, if yaar usse bada kya kaap. Toh I said, boss, rasta toh theek hai. Now, I'm authentic.
[Guest]: I believe I can do this. And now I follow this journey till somebody knocks on my door and says,
[Guest]: Rohit Khanna was one batch senior to you in mass communication, is now at TV18. He has sent me and
[Guest]: said, agar inko leke nahi aaoge toh aayi naukhari chaliyaegi. I said, but kyun? He said, woh ek TV
[Guest]: show bana rahe hain called Public Demand. Now, when I go to do TV, I am a co-host with Mahima
[Guest]: Chaudhary, Ritu Chaudhary, days which she has erased from her mind. And we had Mohan Kapoor
[Guest]: as the main anchor. It was Mohan Kapoor's badappan and he was so comfortable in his own skin that
[Guest]: after two episodes, he said, these kids are better than I am. Why do you need me? He said, see,
[Guest]: I'm sitting in a studio. They're on the road. They're talking to people. They are mad. And,
[Guest]: you know, we had that whole exuberance of youth ke kuch bhi kar sakte hain. Riksha bat jao chalo,
[Guest]: riksha chala lo chala lo, you know, tower pe chad jao chad jao. I used to do the craziest
[Guest]: things in that show. But I now suddenly said, this converting conversations with people
[Guest]: into pithy things that you say as anchor lines. And I said, okay, I'm good at this.
[Guest]: Now, this became what I was doing. And this then translates into translating what people do on
[Guest]: stage and conferences and being the good host who can quickly sum up and put this out. So,
[Guest]: I've understood these are my strengths for a period of time. The same strength of translating
[Guest]: someone's thought into something small and pitching it back to them became the way I would pitch
[Guest]: events. Right? So, somewhere till now, everything is the same. Till, and I often say that as a
[Guest]: creator, I just kept looking for larger audiences. Woh Ravindrale ki audience radio ki ban gayi,
[Guest]: radio ki TV ki ban gayi, TV ki event ki ban gayi, event ki film aur digital ki ban gayi,
[Guest]: aur pata nahi ab kya banegi. You're searching for a larger audience maybe. Sometimes,
[Guest]: you are told in the classic form of saying, boss, for a large audience, go for the lowest common
[Guest]: denominator, not the highest common factor, which I think is a fallacy. But in your young age,
[Guest]: you believe that. Right? And you often believe ki ha chalo yaar, ye toh quick tariqa hai. Countdown
[Guest]: show kar lo, game show kar lo, whatever. But being the slightly intelligent, informed,
[Guest]: fifth member of a nuclear family, it became my role on Indian television. And whenever I fulfilled
[Guest]: that role, I was successful. Whenever I tried to be something else, I wasn't. I did one show as an
[Guest]: actor in Delhi early because I was big on radio. And this Delhi producer wanted me, you know,
[Guest]: Khalid Sultan. And he used to think he's Anthony Quinn. And I mean, everybody's like that. Beta,
[Guest]: maine tumhe kuchh dekh liya hai. Ab maine nahi dekha na, aapne dekh liya hai. After one episode,
[Guest]: I said, yaar ye nahi hota mujhse. You know, theatre acting or screen acting ke beech mein
[Guest]: ek gap hai. Jab aap kehte ho, cut aur phir se karte ho, kehte ho na, theatre actor ko lagta hai,
[Guest]: main toh kal liya. I've done it once. Now I should do a variation. You'll see, and you go with a
[Guest]: theatre actor on a film set, it takes them a little bit of time to say, oh, they want the same thing
[Guest]: again. Because you're saying, it's performance number two. Let me do it differently. Let me
[Guest]: emphasise this line. And the guy is staring his head out saying, I can't edit this shit.
[Guest]: Because that is the way that medium works. So I quickly said, I will not act. And you know,
[Guest]: so many times people said, you know, if you had acted, I said, no, no, it was not my strong suit.
[Guest]: It wasn't what I would have done really well. Toh kyun karun? Toh main hat gaya. Main college
[Guest]: mein gaata bahut tha. Main contest mein, I mean, little piece of thing, KK used to come first,
[Guest]: the singer KK, right, who did Tadap Tadap and all this stuff. Yashwant Singh used to come second.
[Guest]: And I used to come third. First toh aana nahi hai. Toh kyun kar rahe ho? Sonu Nigam toh ban nahi
[Guest]: sakte. So, you know, so it kept sifting out, what you're good at, what you're great at,
[Guest]: what makes you really excited. And, you know, somewhere having reached this little successful
[Guest]: point, my sudden craving started that I want to teach, I want to teach what I know. And in summer,
[Guest]: I started doing these theatre, these workshops for kids from school, because I would be called
[Guest]: to speak to students. And I would again feel this need for them to do things, but nobody doing
[Guest]: anything. And I created the Roshanabad Summer Academy or something. I don't know what it was
[Guest]: called also now. But it was sold on my name, I remember. And we would do a couple of ads on radio
[Guest]: and something. And I had a huge following on radio. So all these kids would turn up. We had
[Guest]: to charge them. And in those days, you know, 5000 bucks for a month, but it was a month every day.
[Guest]: Sab aate the. And I would have 40 kids, odd. So it was decent money, 2 lakhs for you know, that
[Guest]: for that thing. And, and I remember having kids who couldn't afford it. I remember some kids,
[Guest]: you know, and feeling really bad because once I remember that I somebody else took a class
[Guest]: because I couldn't and this lady came to me and said that, you know, don't do this. And I was
[Guest]: like, what do you mean? And she said, I'm a single mother and then our daughter was crying because
[Guest]: she was so embarrassed the mother saying this. So I'm a single mother and I'm doing this for my
[Guest]: mother and I'm doing this for my child. And I just felt like a zameen phad jaye, you know,
[Guest]: because she said, you know, she comes for you. And when you don't do the class, you're cheating her
[Guest]: and you're cheating. And I was like, but you know, I actually wanted this to be a multi and I suddenly
[Guest]: said, nahi yaar, isme koi khot nahi karna hai. You know, and, and I just felt so guilty about that
[Guest]: entire thing that I think I extended the sessions or something or whatever I could, I was to get
[Guest]: too broken up in doing one television show or something else, all this was going on.
[Guest]: In that workshop, I started enjoying teaching, like I would love to teach. And I would teach
[Guest]: public speaking one day, radio one day, theatre one day. Until one day, these kids all came to
[Guest]: me and said, you've taught us everything except for writing. And I said, and I know, and I'm like,
[Guest]: okay, now see, you're playing God to these little bunch of things. How does God say it? Mera paas
[Guest]: hi toh aata nahi hai. I said, kuchh koshish karta hu, mujhe pata nahi hai, but let's do something.
[Guest]: I put together some notes and came back and theatre mein conventions hote hain and told them
[Guest]: to write a script. The kids came back after a week. And they had written about Tom and Jack
[Guest]: and Jill and whatever. And I took all of it and promptly tore it up in front of them. And I said,
[Guest]: likhna hai toh apne baare mein likho, apne experience ke baare mein likho. It's what you
[Guest]: said that, you know, you're this, there's one unique self, which is you. And what they wrote
[Guest]: became inspiration for me to write my first musical, which was called Graffiti. And Graffiti
[Guest]: was about passing out from Modern Barak Khamba in Delhi, because I'd seen that school and I'd
[Guest]: seen that school and I'd seen these young kids and I, and the children had written such wonderful
[Guest]: things. And who was in that workshop? Sameer Kochar, Cyrus Sahukar, Gaurav Kapoor, who had
[Guest]: just become a jockey, so he would occasionally drop in. Priyanka Bose. So people who are today
[Guest]: actors, performers, Neha Dhupia, all of these people were, this was the Delhi lot in those
[Guest]: days. Sudhi Sachdev, I don't know, my God, I can just keep rattling off names. And all these kids
[Guest]: all came together. And now I had to create a musical. And now this creating something which
[Guest]: is your own became my burning desire. I mean, for a year and a half, everything I used to earn,
[Guest]: I would put in this. I came to Bombay, I got Shamak Dawar to do the Graffiti. Shamak was like,
[Guest]: are you mad? I've never gone to Delhi. Baba, I'm never going to come. Shamak, you gotta do this.
[Guest]: What will you charge? You know, and Glenn, who was his manager, turned and said, listen, Roshan,
[Guest]: he is dying to do it or whatever, just push him a little bit more. And then all this happened. And
[Guest]: then all this happened. And we figured out some cost and he started flying in Meridian sponsored
[Guest]: it so he could stay at the hotel. I would pay for the air tickets and stuff and they would land up.
[Guest]: I had a friend who used to be one of the session guitarists for Silk Route. His name was Val
[Guest]: Shipley. He passed away also, I think during the pandemic last year. And, you know, Val would sit
[Guest]: at my house and I would auto narrate the entire thing. I would say this happened, this happened,
[Guest]: this happened, then the song starts. And I would write the song, sing it because I could sing and
[Guest]: Val and I would do, he would do the dooba dooba bit and whatever, which was his song. And then
[Guest]: I would turn and say, okay, do my song. And then we would go and perform it for the kids at the
[Guest]: workshop and they would hear it and say, this is not us. And I would listen to them because it was
[Guest]: about them. And we cobbled together a play with this back and forth, back and forth over eight
[Guest]: months. I think it was the longest rehearsed play because it was in development. And then we did a
[Guest]: show and it was a riot. Kamani Auditorium, where I had learnt my craft, where I had worked under
[Guest]: Aamir, where I had played every role and hung in every rafter and every, you know, side aisle and
[Guest]: things. People broke the door on the last show. And that for me, so now that for me was,
[Guest]: this is creation. This is something which has your name. And even today I meet kids. I remember I
[Guest]: met Shweta Tripathi, the actress. And I met her and the first time I met her, she said, oh my God,
[Guest]: I loved graffiti. You know, and I'm like saying, ye mujhe ab bol rahi hai. Tab lagta hai ke kuch
[Guest]: aisa banaya tha. What year was this? 97. You know, so very, very early days. Bombay aa gaya, you know,
[Guest]: I had a bad first marriage, moved out of that, met Shaheen, came to Bombay. When I came to Bombay,
[Guest]: I came to Bombay because entertainment television was here. Now, entertainment television,
[Guest]: family fortunes, Toofaan Mail, Born Lucky, Public Demand, you know, Shopping Hungama,
[Guest]: these are the shows I was doing. I was doing three TV shows going from one shoot to the other shoot.
[Guest]: This was the time when I was making money. And everything I was doing was, it was, honestly,
[Guest]: if you ask me, I have very few memories of this time because I was just going through a routine.
[Guest]: It was a successful routine. It made me a lot of money. It gave me a huge name.
[Guest]: But I kept getting called back every now and then by someone or the other to say, to this whole
[Guest]: thing of who you are. So I remember I used to do family fortunes where because of a camera position,
[Guest]: I used to have to hold the shoulder of a contestant and pull them into a position because they couldn't
[Guest]: move. There was only, in those days, it was a fixed camera. It didn't have a dolly or anything
[Guest]: or whatever. So you had to keep the person here. And if they changed, we had to reshoot.
[Guest]: And because it's a game show, you can't reshoot. So I used to hold them with an iron grip.
[Guest]: And one day I was walking through Vasant Vihar market and this lady turned and said,
[Guest]: beta, I love your show, etc. I said, ma'am, thank you. She said, can I say something?
[Guest]: She said, yes. She said, you know, don't hold girls by the hand. You know, and I'm offering
[Guest]: an explanation. I said, look, for her, it's me holding a person, you know, and for a Lucknow,
[Guest]: it's only the whole Lucknow conservatism. All these things came to me. And I stopped doing it.
[Guest]: I told you guys, look, brief them seven times, but I'm not going to do this anymore.
[Guest]: So sometimes these small little things, because you say, yes, they do consider me another part
[Guest]: of their family. In those days, what had happened was that with every year of television, I used to
[Guest]: put on a kilo. So I keep saying that I could track my television journey with the 16 kilos that I put
[Guest]: on every year. Ting ting one from starting or whatever, I'm happy at this thing. But it didn't
[Guest]: matter because at that point, television was more about the feeling you gave people.
[Guest]: Or Anu Kapoor was this madcap anchor who knew everything about Hindi music and who could keep
[Guest]: singing for three and a half hours. You know, Cyrus was the mad wit who would just be able to
[Guest]: say, I mean, anything at all. Everyone in television. I don't think anybody was known so much
[Guest]: for the way they looked. There was one or two, they would have one or two anchors who would have
[Guest]: that thing. But we were there for what we said and the way we spoke or the feeling we gave people.
[Guest]: And I said, look, making people comfortable is your place. And I continued with that. So as a
[Guest]: creator, I was continuing down this path. I got involved in Encompass, set up Encompass, sold
[Guest]: Encompass in 2008. And again, this urge to, you know, I've just made money, sold a company, don't
[Guest]: know what to do with the money, honestly. Like I was like, okay, I have two loans to pay. One is a
[Guest]: house, one is my something else, do that. Now we are free. Now, when you have made that money,
[Guest]: I sometimes talk about saying escape velocity, saying creative ideas need escape velocity where
[Guest]: they are not weighed down by material needs. Now there was no material need. Now I can follow my
[Guest]: madcap dream. Madcap dream is to make graffiti into a film. And lo and behold, I start anchoring
[Guest]: shows with Shah Rukh and I'm traveling across the world and I'm enjoying, I'm seeing this
[Guest]: consummate master performer. Again, I said that I can write books on that time because
[Guest]: that man knew, he knew what to do with an audience. He knew in a conversation, he was the most
[Guest]: intelligent guy in the conversation who would keep dumping things down for people. And sometimes I
[Guest]: think that's what he's done with some of the films that he dumps them down so much for people. But
[Guest]: and what he loved was that every show I would ask him different questions.
[Guest]: No, I would ask him some madcap question and he would turn and say,
[Guest]: you asked me this today, whatever. And it was a great exchange. And on the fifth show or something,
[Guest]: we were in Dubai and he was sitting and he, you know, half an hour, we had a break before the
[Guest]: show and he turned and said, so I said, really? And this is where over that period of time in my
[Guest]: head, I had figured that for Shah Rukh Khan to be engaged in something, either you really know what
[Guest]: he wants, or you tell him that he's not needed. And I just turned to him and I turned and said,
[Guest]: hi, doesn't need a star like you. And now romanticism of the moment, maybe,
[Guest]: or maybe he already wanted to make a film about kids and whatever. And he was saying yes,
[Guest]: and he knew about it, maybe. But for me, the wonderful moment is that he turned and said,
[Guest]: really? And I said, because it's about teenagers, it's about young kids, a young you was 15 or 16
[Guest]: could have done it, but it could do with the support of an actor like you. Because you know,
[Guest]: young kids launched in Bollywood will be anonymous. I said, interesting. I don't want to do films
[Guest]: that are only about me. I've done Billu Barber with Irrfan. I'd like to do this. So when you
[Guest]: come to Bombay, you let me hear the script. I remember we were flying back and I was so excited
[Guest]: and I always used to keep a draft of the play. So I went in the flight only to give it to him and he
[Guest]: was sleeping and he looked at me and says, yeah, Bombay, Bombay. And two weeks later, I got a call
[Guest]: and you know, he said, why don't you come over? And then you go to Mannat with a Mannat in your
[Guest]: heart saying, oh, something will happen. And I narrated my play script to them, which I'd
[Guest]: converted into semi screenplay. And he heard it and he said, some things I love about it. He said,
[Guest]: one or two things I think cinematically are not right. And I turned and said, see, I've never
[Guest]: made a film before you have. And you've made so many. So I will look for you for guidance or
[Guest]: whatever and things. I said, you know, I like it. And so 2008 to 2011, perhaps the longest journey
[Guest]: of not the longest, I think many people have spent many more years in making a film. But I went
[Guest]: through, you know, drafts of writing, doing this, doing that. And while I was doing all the writing
[Guest]: drafts of the script, you know, there has to be a point when you say no. But here now became the
[Guest]: burning ambition as a creator that I want to make a film. Only 200 people in India get to make a
[Guest]: film. I have a producer like Shah Rukh. My God, okay, let's do this because he knows this better,
[Guest]: or whatever, etc. You know, and the road to hell is paved with good intention in some. So again,
[Guest]: it's even today, like some people say, you know, you you beat yourself too much about it or
[Guest]: whatever, etc. It's a nice, it's not it's not, it's not what I had set out to be. My first draft
[Guest]: is not what I finally made. So that creative compromise is what I'm unhappy about the learning
[Guest]: I got everything that I got to know, Ali Fazal being discovered as part of the film. I mean,
[Guest]: just a brilliant boy, and I made him do every Bollywood convention, which he must be hating,
[Guest]: I'm sure and I feel sorry, Ali. But, but you know, but he learned it, he enjoyed it also,
[Guest]: I think at times, and then Gizelli and Zoa and Satyajit. But you know, these four young kids
[Guest]: and doing that film, doing it in Lamartiniya, almost paying a tribute to school in a sense,
[Guest]: these were the really happy moments. But 2011, when I came out from it, I had a creative vacuum,
[Guest]: because I had put everything I knew into the film, from from just from an intellectual capital and
[Guest]: whatever else. And you you discover that it's a medium which has eight department heads, right?
[Guest]: There's an editor who knows this better, there's a cinematographer who knows this better, blah,
[Guest]: blah, blah. And working with all of them is a different story. So the very, very, very long
[Guest]: journey of what you said, but I think as a creator, it keeps going from these,
[Guest]: there's some personal things that you're trying to fill, right? I mean, some of you're saying,
[Guest]: I've defined myself to be the fifth member of that family, it's a great place to be.
[Guest]: But do I want to do more? I want to teach because I want to impart what I have learned. So the
[Guest]: workshops, but I want to do more. These kids life suddenly has struck me so hard, because I remember
[Guest]: the things that written then I was like, Oh, my God, it has to be written. And so I dedicate two
[Guest]: years to just doing that play. And I mean, and thank God for all the people in Compass who
[Guest]: have supported me at that time. But I did that play, you know, and, and that play actually set
[Guest]: many things for Encompass right as well. But my creator piece was I put that up. And then I'm
[Guest]: doing fun, fun, fun, fun, fun. And it's everything's safe and comfortable till Shah Rukh's moment
[Guest]: happens. And I'm like, Oh, my God, that one opportunity to make a film and put something
[Guest]: which will perhaps be there for posterity. And that happens. And I then went through this whole
[Guest]: creative vacuum, because I suddenly, you know, everything that can happen mentally, physically
[Guest]: started happening to me, because I think a lot of your insecurities and start manifesting physically,
[Guest]: I, I was physically really ill after the film just, oh, I've got an issue with is it a prostrate
[Guest]: issue? Is it this issue? And I'm like, I'm 40? How is this happening to me? And I'm 41.
[Guest]: And I realized that my mind is not in the right place. And my friends realize this and a whole
[Guest]: bunch of my friends, and you know, and all of them, whether it was Vikram, whether it was Gaurav,
[Guest]: Ankur, Mini, Shaheen, my wife, you know, everyone said, listen, you can make mistakes when you've
[Guest]: had so much success. And I think, you know, this is said by the author of Eat, Love, Pray.
[Guest]: Right when she says, you know, that you've what if the first thing you do so successful,
[Guest]: then what do you do next? When you've seen a lot of success, and then suddenly something doesn't
[Guest]: work the way you thought it would. Suddenly is this thing of saying, am I a failure? Do I know
[Guest]: things right? Am I, am I really creative? And that's when you have hit that, you know, that cave,
[Guest]: which they talk about in the hero's journey. And I'm like, yeah, I know that I know that place.
[Guest]: And what brings you out, frankly, was the set of friends who said, it's all right to fail,
[Guest]: everybody fails, there is no problem, you can make a mistake. And it took me a lot of time,
[Guest]: because I'm very hard on myself, very, very hard on myself with these things.
[Guest]: And the one thing that happened there, which really got me was this discovery of, you know,
[Guest]: I mean, Julia Cameron happened, and I read The Artist's Way, and those two things of doing
[Guest]: creative dates, and doing pages. So pages, I don't do regularly, I do it for a period of time,
[Guest]: I did it after your workshop, you know, for a period of time, and spurts. But that dating
[Guest]: creative disciplines, you know, and going on a creative date, I started doing. And that's
[Guest]: where Commune happened, because I suddenly discovered Sarah Kay. And I said, wow, this is
[Guest]: amazing. Who is Sarah Kay? What is spoken word? And now I went down that rabbit hole, you know,
[Guest]: so that curiosity of saying, yeh kya hai, kaise hota hai, kahan hota hai, kaun karta hai. And
[Guest]: then collaborators, I mean, Vijay and OML gave us our first performance at stage, they were
[Guest]: wanting to do a festival called Stage 42. And I did that festival, Ankur and Gaurav coming in,
[Guest]: Ankur saying, listen, don't sell out at any point, what you've created is pure and beautiful. And
[Guest]: he's a founder at Commune, because he sometimes is like, main nahi karta ho bahut kuch. And I
[Guest]: say, you're busy with your life, but just keep us pure and authentic. You're our conscience
[Guest]: keeper. Tess Joseph, who's an executive director, casting director, great performer, conscience
[Guest]: keeper. These two. Gaurav came and said, dekho, you and Ankur, you both love this 100 people
[Guest]: clapping for you, because tum log stage ke log hai. I am spoiled. I am a man who's made his
[Guest]: career on television. Main woh 15 minute ka show karta hoon, aadhi gante ka show karta hoon,
[Guest]: cricket ka aur uski broadcast ki wajah se main on karta hoon. Whatever you do, make it digital.
[Guest]: And I was like, but why do we need to let it rest in its origin? He's like, no, no, boss,
[Guest]: this is all very good for you, you know, and theatre types. And I was like, you're right.
[Guest]: And we just put everything and recorded it. So this became the trio that sort of came together
[Guest]: for Commune. And phir woh jo hota na hai ki main akela hi chala tha, jaane mein manzil magar,
[Amit Varma]: log saath aate gaye aur karwa banta gaye. Yeah, in fact, you gave a TEDx talk,
[Amit Varma]: which I'll link from the show notes where you had this really pithy quote where you said,
[Amit Varma]: build campfires to attract fellow travellers. And that's exactly what this is. So very resonant.
[Amit Varma]: You mentioned Vikram there, by the way. Vikram Sathya, close personal friend of mine also for
[Amit Varma]: many, many years. So shout out to him if he is listening. Many, many questions emerged from this,
[Amit Varma]: but I'm so glad that you took me down your journey in the manner that you did. Just wonderful.
[Amit Varma]: You mentioned your time in radio when you were like doing three shows a day to earn that 10,000.
[Amit Varma]: And at one point, you used a phrase in one of your earlier interviews that I became people's habit.
[Amit Varma]: And that's really struck with me because that's a phrase that you would associate in a sense
[Amit Varma]: with this economy of intimacy, which we see today burgeoning. Like when someone starts a podcast,
[Amit Varma]: one of the things I tell them is that you want to become someone's habit. Ki har monday morning
[Amit Varma]: do ghanta sir ke liye hai. You want to become someone's habit. So it's important to be regular
[Amit Varma]: and to keep doing it and all of that, because they feel that connection, right? It's almost like,
[Amit Varma]: you know, you spoke about being the fifth member and all that. So to my mind, this is something
[Amit Varma]: relatively new, given the scale that it's happening in. But you clearly experienced it
[Guest]: very early. And you know, because, because you know what happened was that see,
[Guest]: I realized this because Times FM, we used to go record, come back and because I was a freelancer,
[Guest]: I would go I would shoot the breeze with everyone in the afternoon. That was TimeStyle,
[Guest]: which was a lot of fun people and a lot of friends even today. Lots of radio jockeys,
[Guest]: Rajesh Soni, who's my partner in crime at the Venture Capital Fund, GSF, you know,
[Guest]: he was the sales head and so great bunch of people, but I could choose going in and so I
[Guest]: would do my show, go there, come back. At the end of one year of Times FM,
[Guest]: they decided to do a road show to celebrate Times FM success. And by this time, they would not give
[Guest]: us our mail or whatever, etc. We would get some messages that would be collected by someone.
[Guest]: We stepped out onto the road and I remember we were in front of Gargi College. And we were
[Guest]: supposed to go into the college and suddenly there was some lack of permission, whatever.
[Guest]: So you're waiting outside Gargi, the entire college boycotted the college and came onto the road.
[Guest]: And on that van, some people were dancing, Sanjay Rehna was singing his song at that point in time,
[Guest]: one song he had which was very popular in Delhi. Veronica Jacob and the Planets were
[Guest]: dancing and we were standing at the back and we were just hearing chants of our names.
[Guest]: You know, that moment, that was the day when I realized, boss, you are their habit. Because you
[Guest]: saw it up front. And that was when I said, boss, and I could see the production and the production
[Guest]: and I could see the production and the people used to manage us. I could see fear in their eyes saying,
[Guest]: oh my God, these guys are bigger than the station. And after that, there was a big boycott because
[Guest]: all of us wanted our contracts. I don't want my contract to be negotiated. They said, everybody
[Guest]: become an employee. I said, I don't want that. And it was it was Mr. Vineet Jain who actually
[Guest]: came and I mean, God bless him because these guys were adamant. They said, we'll put you off air.
[Guest]: I said, you can do anything you want. I'm not signing an employee contract. And he came and
[Guest]: said, what is the boy saying? They said this. I said, let him be. Because I think somewhere he
[Guest]: saw the power. And I was not asking, I wasn't suddenly being greedy saying, pay me 10 times.
[Guest]: Nothing. I said, guys, this is what I want. I just want it instead of doing three shows a day,
[Guest]: because I was doing a Hindi show, a morning show. I used to do a rock show in the morning,
[Guest]: an afternoon show in Hindi. And then I used to do this talk show in the, I mean, the dial in.
[Guest]: And then at some point when I found it too claustrophobic and I started doing television,
[Guest]: I moved out and I started doing Live Wire. And Live Wire was a show because everybody said in
[Guest]: those days, you know, the phone was dead live. There was just a five second pause. And they said,
[Guest]: if somebody abuses, somebody curses, you know, this can be a case. But we were just trying and
[Guest]: experimenting with a show. And on that show, the letters we started getting, see, it was still the
[Guest]: time when people wrote postcards and inland letters. And my home, because my home address
[Guest]: was there, they didn't stop you from taking it. And when you read them, you could sit for nights
[Guest]: and it was your, it was your little fan fiction, you know, bit that you were reading. And there
[Guest]: would be people talking about their deepest secrets, intimacy, love, you know, people want
[Guest]: proposed marriage, all that would happen, I was married, I'm like, marriage proposal has come,
[Guest]: all this would happen. And one day on one of the shows, and it's something that I, you know,
[Guest]: in India Today, I think they talked about it once, is that this girl called and the India Today
[Guest]: reporters had come that day to sit in on the show, by chance. And this girl called and the minute we
[Guest]: were talking and something, she said this thing about saying, why do you all lie so much?
[Guest]: And you know, I was like, yeh kya bol rahi hai? And my ego was playing up saying, she's telling
[Guest]: a radio jock that he lies, main iski halat kharab kar dunga, main yeh sab bolunga. And she just
[Guest]: suddenly went into this thing of saying, you know, you lie, the government lies, the army lies.
[Guest]: And I said, there's something deep here. And I said, what are you talking about? She says,
[Guest]: you know, my brother, he went in the army, he went to Siachen. And she said, you know,
[Guest]: he never won a medal or whatever, because you know, he died for no reason. He died of gangrene.
[Guest]: But he wasn't in a battle. No, no, you know, and in my head, I'm suddenly, you know, going into
[Guest]: Nobels were told for him, etc. in my head. And I realized this girl is yeh hatash hai.
[Guest]: She's depressed. And the way she was talking, and you know, and I want to rid myself of these lies,
[Guest]: and I want to rid myself of this world, I said, Oh, God, this might be a suicide caller.
[Guest]: But she has called me out up front and said, you lie. So anything I say to her, she won't believe.
[Guest]: And that's the moment when I noticed that the biggest moment of my life, honestly, from that
[Guest]: decade was that I remember I turned and said, I've got a pager, I used to have a pager, people used
[Guest]: to message me the numbers, and I used to call them. And I said, dekho, main call pe toh isi ko
[Guest]: rakhunga. Aur yeh mujh pe wiswas nahi rakhti hai, this girl doesn't believe in me. But if you all
[Guest]: want to resurrect her belief, send messages for her, I'll wait here. And there's a 30 second gap
[Guest]: before people obviously have heard it and are sending messages. And there was silence. And I
[Guest]: narrate this often at Commune as a story. And I say that, you know, that for a while, it was just
[Guest]: a flat line. And suddenly the pages started beeping. And with every beep, there was a message
[Guest]: and there were messages in broken English. Sister, I'm brother of yours from Haryana, whatever. But
[Guest]: I kept reading those messages, messages, messages, messages. And then I had queued
[Guest]: Everybody Hurts by R.E.M. And I used to read a lot of stuff. So Vikram Seth had this poem,
[Guest]: All You Who Sleep Tonight. And I just turned and said, I said, you know, if you're still on the
[Guest]: line, all I want to say to you is not my words, because you don't believe in them, but I will use
[Guest]: Vikram Seth's words. And I said, All You Who Sleep Tonight, I said the entire poem. And I played
[Guest]: Everybody Hurts below and, you know, just segued into it. And that was the end of the show. And
[Guest]: these reporters were sitting behind and they were like, boss, yeh kya hua hai? And then that girl
[Guest]: paged me and said, you know, thank you. You know, it just, for me, this was the moment of saying,
[Guest]: this is the power of a creator. So, you know, I said this thing about becoming a habit. I saw
[Guest]: these things happen. And I would say, yeh hai, this is a habit being formed. And this just used
[Guest]: to go on and on. And this intimacy with the audience actually continued with me. Mere ghar
[Guest]: pe ek baar ghanti baji, you know, my wife opened the door. And this girl came and sat with a cake
[Guest]: and she said, main roshan ke liye laayi hoon. And she just sat there. You know, and I was sat and I
[Guest]: said, aap kaun hai? She didn't say a word, sat, got up and left after that. Pata hi nahi kaun hai,
[Guest]: aaj tak nahi pata kaun hai. But yeh cheeze hoti thi, because you were that close to your audience.
[Guest]: So I, you know, I realized then that there was this intimacy that I could build across screens.
[Guest]: Maini television pe hi kar raha tha, jab maini Sinistars ki khoj kari thi, which is a show on Zee,
[Guest]: which actually, if you ask me, was the Indian precursor to any of these Indian idols got talent,
[Guest]: because Gajendra knew the pulse of people and he used to do Antakshari and Sare Gama Pa,
[Guest]: which were the two biggest shows. And he got Sinistars ki khoj to happen and I became the
[Guest]: anchor for it. Aur jab main wo show anchor kar raha tha, jo sare bachche usme the, bachche
[Guest]: mata because they were selected from various cities as young actors and two of them would win.
[Guest]: And become the, these Sinistars and Zee would make a film with them. And every week,
[Guest]: these kids would become closer to me. And even today, if you go to my Facebook,
[Guest]: they're all my friends. Kisi ko bacha ho gaya hai, kisi ne yeh kar liya hai,
[Guest]: kisi ne car wash ki business khol rakhi hai, koi producer ban gaya hai, kisi ki film last
[Guest]: year release hui hai. But they're still in my circle. And this ability to keep those people
[Guest]: in your circle, I think is important. Because very often as creators, we carve our path and
[Guest]: we just keep leaving people behind. And in that same TEDx thing that I said, I called it the
[Guest]: roadless travel, if you remember, because I said that dekho, rasta hi nahi tha, there was no road.
[Guest]: You made the road and you build these campfires and you leave them for people to follow.
[Guest]: And honestly, I think that's what somewhere I believe is my creator journey and keeps me going.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, that's a moving story. I teared up during it because it's so powerful. And you were talking
[Amit Varma]: about writing letters to people, physical letters. And I remember in Delhi, like after I graduated
[Amit Varma]: from college, I worked for a year in Delhi, 94 to 95. And I was listening to FM one day,
[Amit Varma]: and there was one guy who was talking like a normal person, but playing music I loved,
[Amit Varma]: which I wouldn't expect to hear on radio. So there was like Velvet Underground.
[Amit Varma]: So I thought, so I wrote him a fan mail, physical letter, and he replied with a physical letter,
[Amit Varma]: which is stunning. I don't even remember his name. But that that is such a beautiful moment
[Amit Varma]: of connect. Now, it also strikes me that, therefore, there are, in a sense, two kinds
[Amit Varma]: of connections. One is this intimate connection where you feel like you know this person so well,
[Amit Varma]: which I feel for the podcasters I listen to regularly, and I get that same feeling back
[Amit Varma]: from people who listen to the show. The other is that whole superstar projection kind of thing,
[Amit Varma]: ki jaise Amitabh Bachchan hai, mandir banaliya. In fact, your predecessor at Jamia in the
[Amit Varma]: Maskom course, Shah Rukh Khan is exactly an example of that. It's so much larger than life.
[Amit Varma]: So huge. And in a sense, you must have faced both you must have experienced both adulation
[Guest]: in the second sense. Yes, when I was on television, a lot of Shaheen, you know,
[Guest]: I met her in Bombay. And you know, I, we traveled once to the auto expo. And she was so irritated
[Guest]: on the end of day one, she says, all the girls come to me and say, you're his girlfriend? Yes.
[Guest]: But I wanted to marry him. She says, I've heard this through the day, what are these people?
[Guest]: So I say, yaar yeh kuch nahi hai, toh fan following hai and whatever, you know, but
[Guest]: that used to happen. But you know, I'll tell you, superstars are supernovas, which carry a,
[Guest]: and it's been written about Steve Jobs, right, saying that around them, they carry a magnetism,
[Guest]: which is a, I'm forgetting the exact phrase, but but you know, they say that it's this
[Guest]: circle of disbelief. The minute you enter that field, you believe anything they say.
[Guest]: And I've noticed it upfront. I've been with Mr. Bachchan, I've done interviews with him and
[Guest]: whatever. Wo ek magnetism, jisko bolte hai aura and superstar and all this stuff. Wo ek genuine
[Guest]: belief se stem karta hai that I know I'm a superstar. That was never me. In my head, I was,
[Guest]: I know was never the phrase. You think I am, I'm grateful was my thing. And it has always been me.
[Guest]: Very often, you know, people turn and say, why do people approach you? People will call me with
[Guest]: saying, Roshan, I'm getting this much money, what should I do, whatever, etc. I say because
[Guest]: na main usme kuch apna dhoond raha hota hu. And main sant banne kushan nahi kar raha ho, par mujhe
[Guest]: kya zarurat hai? Tomorrow, I've had three comedians call me saying, sir, doing this contract, is this
[Guest]: worthwhile? Do you think we should do it? And I'm like, I'll take a very scientific, yeah,
[Guest]: you should do it. But I'm putting, I'm not saying, acha, you know, agar main isme aaja hoon,
[Guest]: agar main isme aaja hoon, which is such a Bombay thing, such an industry thing. One of the famous
[Guest]: stories that I once remember was that one actor had bought a car, actor, right? And the car must
[Guest]: have been at least a crore, right? A couple of years ago, so imagine one of those big vehicles.
[Guest]: And a friend of his, who was another actor, saw the car and you know, his driver was with him.
[Guest]: And I know it because my driver knew the driver. So his driver was with him. And the driver turned
[Guest]: in at the start and said, boss, I love this vehicle. Can you get me one as well?
[Guest]: His haath, tereko accha price dila dunga. So he said, oh, great, great, great, and whatever.
[Guest]: So when the guy sat in the car, he told the driver, ke saamne he called the guy from whom
[Guest]: he'd got the car. He says, suno, so and so ne gaadi maangi hai, maine tumhe recommend kiya,
[Guest]: mera 2% rakh lena. I said, you're a guy who can afford a car worth a crore, and you still want 2%
[Guest]: in the other vehicle. Par yeh attitude hai. You know, and many people say this is the cost of
[Guest]: doing business. But it's not the cost at which I do business, and I will never do it. And I have
[Guest]: friends who'll turn and say, but you know, it's my way. I say, yaar, tumhe lagta hai toh karlo,
[Guest]: main nahi karta. Main isme vishwas nahi rakta, I don't believe it. And is it just my imagination
[Amit Varma]: ki jo new creator economy hai, creators, YouTube wale, podcast wale, unmein yeh nahi hai?
[Amit Varma]: Because I see so many people, in a sense, just willing to help and share. And perhaps because
[Amit Varma]: they haven't gotten that mindset, they're much younger, perhaps because they know the ecosystem.
[Guest]: There are both sorts. Honestly, I've come across both sorts. Frankly, though, there are far more
[Guest]: of the ones I'm happy to help and share. But there is a set, a lot of it depends on how secure or
[Guest]: insecure they are. I've seen this with huge actors as well also, by the way, helping another actor
[Guest]: on set. But as a set, who will not do it? There are people who are still in competition with their
[Guest]: own, you know, people who they've worked with for 40 years and still want to score a point. I mean,
[Guest]: the other day we were having this conversation, when I heard it, I just kept cracking up saying,
[Guest]: really? That person's been in the industry for over 25 years. I said, nahi, but they're in
[Guest]: competition. Because you know, that person is still in competition with everyone because that's
[Guest]: their elixir, that's what drives them. I said, theek hai yaar. I'm waiting for your tell-all
[Guest]: memoir. Saare naam chahiye sir. Jaise aapke hai, ek writer, jinka aap naam nahi lete,
[Amit Varma]: mere aise bohot hai. Next question is about learning. How does one learn? Like, one learns
[Amit Varma]: by doing, which of course everybody knows. But one of the things I've realized recently is that one
[Amit Varma]: learns also by teaching. So you have taught so much. Tell me a little bit about that experience
[Amit Varma]: and are there any specific times where you remember ki yeh sikha ke maine yeh sikha?
[Guest]: Nahi nahi, toh aisa, pehli baat toh yeh hai, kaise ek play construct karte hain, toh maine
[Guest]: seekha hi ek logon ko sikha ke. I had never written a play before. But those children's
[Guest]: belief in me saying, you teach us. And when they wrote and me being able to tear that stuff and
[Guest]: say, this is rubbish, and them coming back and then talking about themselves. And I mean, I
[Guest]: never forget this one girl writing about, my mother doesn't let me take part in athletics
[Guest]: because she thinks I'll scrape my knees and not be a contestant for Miss India because I couldn't
[Guest]: stand in the bikini round. So that hit me and I said, oh my God. Now, creating that play required
[Guest]: me to sell a dream to X number of people and travel with them. But it happened because the
[Guest]: fuel was the belief of all these children. These children stuck by me for two years,
[Guest]: saying we believe. And I think if a teacher wants to be a doer, see, that is the thing of I learn.
[Guest]: And Elton, when I had left school had given me a card, I still remember and it's written that,
[Guest]: you know, it said that he who can does and you cannot teaches. You know, and he wrote this line,
[Guest]: I was and I said, so you buy you writing this and he said, No, no, my boy, I've never moved
[Guest]: beyond this college. And, you know, I know that you have always gone beyond the boundaries. And
[Guest]: I have often learned from you. And you'll do really well in the universe and whatever. And I
[Guest]: think at one level, I keep saying to people say, No, who are you beholden to? And I said, my parents
[Guest]: and Elton, because I was always thinking of how to do good by them, good by them. And I continued
[Guest]: this. And this bit of people believing in you, but do I often see a lot of teachers who are not
[Guest]: able to practice what they're teaching you feel extremely jealous of the fact that you have that
[Guest]: I've seen it, okay. So, you have to bridge that thing like in film school, I remember saying,
[Guest]: you know,
[Guest]: I don't want to live my life with your guilt, the guilt of you having had a bad moment. So don't
[Guest]: guilt trip your students. I've seen fine teachers have this old teachers have this habit of guilt
[Guest]: tripping their students.
[Guest]: When I when I move forward from that teaching experience, when I set up an event company, I
[Guest]: would often be called to run workshops in institutes. So I would go to symbiosis, I would
[Guest]: go to EMDI, I would go to so many places and teach. I set up a radio institute here for two years
[Guest]: with when FM had just started saying, who can teach radio to people. And after two years, every
[Guest]: station started doing their own courses. So we said, we don't need this course anymore.
[Guest]: When I went to teach at symbiosis, I was reminded by Rohit and Varun, who are the Glitch Founders
[Guest]: saying you remember the class where you came and said, how events become TV, and then you asked us
[Guest]: to come up with an idea. And these boys came up. And I still remember the idea. It was called
[Guest]: English Babu Desi Meme. And what they said was that we'll take 10 city slickers and put them in
[Guest]: a village. And they have to make uplas and they've got to cook food on a changithi. And the anchors
[Guest]: of the show are Ravi Kisan and Malaika Arora. And I heard that I said, guys, can you leave this
[Guest]: college right now I will give you a job. And I said, we'll go and make this show. And they were
[Guest]: like, hey, we've got six more months or whatever. So many years later, these are the people I meet
[Guest]: and they become glitch. And when I met them, I said, you're the same guys. And they were like,
[Guest]: I told you that so long back, and they did the titles for my film because I had no money.
[Guest]: But very often in this little relationship that you build with people, you're able to do these
[Guest]: kinds of things. I think teaching, you don't just you learn when you tell people I don't know,
[Guest]: I am very happy to say, I don't know at times. But before that, I'm a curious seeker,
[Guest]: like in the creator economy, there's so much going on. I know 30% really well, but there is this
[Guest]: dao, mao, whatever, etc. You'll have to do a little bit of crypto, you'll have to do a token, make some mistakes
[Guest]: and tell a whole set of young creators, I don't know. I know this, but I don't know this. Can we
[Guest]: work it together? Like when we built Glitch, and actually when Varun and Rohit built Glitch, but
[Guest]: they used me, they used me at times in a really fun way. That when Pooja pitched herself who's
[Guest]: now married to Varun, Pooja got him to pitch and said, these guys are great at creative,
[Guest]: they're shit at strategy, you need a strategic head. And I said, great. And then two days later,
[Guest]: I got Varun now saying, by the way, we've got a problem saying Pooja has pitched herself to us as
[Guest]: strategy head, what do we do? So what do you mean, what do we do? She's a great person,
[Guest]: let's take her. So but you know, I'm also having a relationship with her. So what if she doesn't
[Guest]: work out? What do we do? I said, I'll tell you what, let me be the front person for this, because
[Guest]: neither of you should take the blow, you're best friends. Let me handle. And I had that conversation.
[Guest]: And even today, for whatever it's worth to her, but to me, it means a lot. I am Pooja's mentor.
[Guest]: But like it's that one conversation a month, it's that one chat in a quarter, it's the one,
[Guest]: how do I handle this? And I really value that, because I will not tell her that I know how to
[Guest]: run a digital agency. But what I know, I know, and I'm in I'm available to you to teach you that,
[Guest]: but I will immediately turn and say this, I don't know, and I want to learn from you.
[Guest]: You know, I'll give an example. Suddenly, somebody reached a commune and said, you know,
[Guest]: can you do a mass campaign for us? And I said, we don't do this, you know, sorry,
[Guest]: this transmedia campaign that will happen across mediums. I said, see, the core idea we've given
[Guest]: is beautiful. I don't want to lose it for not knowing this. I connect with Pooja, Pooja,
[Guest]: can you tell us how this is done? I'm just asking that, you know, Varun, can you tell me this or
[Guest]: somebody else, you know, and, and I'm very happy to reach out to people and ask them. Because the
[Guest]: other thing that I've learned is, we Indians in Lucknow used to die of shame. We won't ask,
[Guest]: we'll die, but we won't ask. So I was told, once I remember, Shaheen and I had a fight,
[Guest]: and one of our aunts said, listen, if you don't like this thing, tell her. Don't expect God to
[Guest]: drop into and whisper it into her ear, or that some Lucknow guy will tell, who will tell, a third
[Guest]: person will come and tell it to her. And it was still a problem to me if you asked me to say
[Guest]: things, saying things directly. But I ask what I don't know, and if someone wants it, then I'm
[Guest]: asking because now I don't have that shame that somebody will say no. Earlier I used to feel that
[Guest]: if I ask and somebody says no, then it's, I am unworthy. But I don't think that anymore.
[Amit Varma]: Yeah, and you know, you mentioned that thing about your film teacher saying, don't touch the
[Amit Varma]: film. And I'm reminded of this old saying, this old Japanese saying, which was, if I remember
[Amit Varma]: correctly, if you want to make a man a pauper, gift him a camera. Because pura paisa film mein
[Amit Varma]: chale jaayega. And today that's just not there. It's like, you know, we kind of take it for
[Amit Varma]: granted. I've taken a lot of your time. So I'll head towards sort of final general questions.
[Amit Varma]: One of them is this, that, you know, the pinned tweet on your Twitter feed is, quote,
[Amit Varma]: humility is not thinking less of yourself, it is thinking of yourself less, stop quote. It's
[Amit Varma]: by C.S. Lewis. And humility is a question I want to ask about because one thing that I have
[Amit Varma]: noticed, and you will, of course, have the humility to shrug away the compliment,
[Amit Varma]: but one thing I've noticed is your tremendous humility in the sense that one would imagine a
[Amit Varma]: person with the kind of career that you have had with your achievements behind you, you'll bring
[Amit Varma]: an attitude with it, but you are so open, so curious about, you know, learning from other
[Amit Varma]: people, you know, as you just mentioned, just always starting these campfires, taking fellow
[Amit Varma]: travelers. In that talk that you gave, you also spoke about the philosophy of geese, where you
[Amit Varma]: don't have to be a leader all the time, you know, so it's like a cycling peloton, there'll be one
[Amit Varma]: person leading and then they'll drop back and so on and so forth. Is this something that's come
[Amit Varma]: with age? Because it is something that I did not have. And I had to cultivate it and become
[Amit Varma]: conscious of it and realize that I was making many mistakes because of this. And it came over
[Guest]: a period of time. No, I think this has been there from the very beginning, simply because,
[Guest]: as I said, my parents, from a very early age turned and said that, you know,
[Guest]: my father used to always say that, you know,
[Guest]: and genuinely to live in the hearts you leave behind is not to die, right? I mean, then,
[Guest]: I mean, that's a stone for Danny Fisher of all things, I don't know, Robbins, but, you know,
[Guest]: it's something I remember, because it was a line about this whole piece, that piece starts with
[Guest]: saying the dead will lie below their monuments, remembered for what they build, but not for who
[Guest]: they were, you know, but for me, and he's talking about a common man, and he says, for me, when
[Guest]: everyone, when a person cries for their loved one, they cry for me, you know, and I remember
[Guest]: these elocution pieces, but this one resonated with me for that reason.
[Guest]: Without stressing how important you are, when I did Aladin, Vikrant, who was my director,
[Guest]: I remember the last day he just came in, he just said, he says, you know, I had to give you very
[Guest]: little direction, but I, but he said, you know, what I loved was that you came on time every day,
[Guest]: you attended every rehearsal, whether you were required or not, not once did I hear you complain,
[Guest]: I heard people half your age do that, and he says, I just want to tell you that this is the quality,
[Guest]: yeah, you're a great actor, yeah, you've got a great voice, yeah, you did this, etc, etc.
[Guest]: And I don't know, I mean, you know, I keep saying, be interesting or be interested,
[Guest]: and I'm always interested, because I mean, and that's what maybe just keeps it interesting as
[Guest]: well. And that doesn't happen with this, you know, let me tell you about me.
[Guest]: That's such a great line, be interesting or be interested, lovely line.
[Amit Varma]: What other advice would you give young creators today who are looking at this creator economy,
[Amit Varma]: who have multiplicity of opportunities, which can often be bewildering, who also have this
[Amit Varma]: expectation or this desire for validation, which is perhaps even greater than ours,
[Amit Varma]: because we live in an age where everyone's competing so hard for validation through
[Amit Varma]: social media with all the posturing that goes on. It's just constant. What advice would you give?
[Guest]: You know, fame is ephemeral, it comes and it goes. I said it that day in the evening when
[Guest]: we're having that conversation saying don't forget that the TNC of the creator contract is trust and
[Guest]: credibility, right? That those are the two tenets that you've got to live by. The day the trust
[Guest]: breaks, the day they think you are a false prophet, they have so many other people to turn to.
[Guest]: And this cancel culture, unfortunately, doesn't give you a second chance. So just remember that,
[Guest]: because it's a very heady feeling. I see a lot of young people making mistakes, then I feel,
[Guest]: should I call them and tell them? And I say, baby, it's not my place to do so.
[Guest]: If they ever ask me, I tell them. I tell them very, very clearly. And I mince no words about it.
[Guest]: But I just feel that this is very important, you know,
[Guest]: that's the important thing. And that's the one thing I keep telling people saying,
[Guest]: because I can see people suddenly making lots of money,
[Guest]: costing 500 people. So that's it. And it's not over till it's over. So number one,
[Guest]: you know, if you're losing, it's not over till you're over. If you're winning,
[Guest]: it's not over till it's over. So stay with it, you know, know the limits to what you have to do.
[Amit Varma]: And what's ahead of you now? Like we've established we're both young, you're only 50.
[Amit Varma]: So I'm 47. So we're both young. What lies ahead of you now? What do you look forward to in the
[Guest]: decades to come inshallah? So approximately a month or two ago, I came across a small
[Guest]: WhatsApp forward, you know, where there was this gentleman who I'm forgetting his name,
[Guest]: but he was the he runs a big foundation, which helps students and things. And he was also the
[Guest]: head of HCL technology, so I'm not mistaken. And it was a it was a young entrepreneurs thing for
[Guest]: times or something where he'd come out and he spoke and he said that Mr. Nair, and he said that
[Guest]: he told a parable about this and who's asked what do you want to be one guy said I want to be the
[Guest]: fastest and I want to be this thing and whatever. And the last time turns I want to be a butterfly.
[Guest]: Right? He said, think of something so scary that people think you're going to suck.
[Guest]: I had stopped thinking scary. Honestly, the last scary thing I thought was spoken fest,
[Guest]: and we built it, it was scary as hell. But my God, was it a high to see those people walking
[Guest]: into geo garden and then see those numbers grow? Right and commune spoken festival I told him I
[Guest]: told China said I'm investing a child's education money in this because I know how much money goes
[Guest]: into a festival. But the returns are tremendous there. I do believe that I want to take that
[Guest]: brand global and it's a scary thought because it requires me to invest time, effort, money.
[Guest]: I do want to build commune as a global organization. And I have to understand many other cultures,
[Guest]: which I know nothing about. Right, right now I'm exploring the Middle East, there's India,
[Guest]: there's UK, there's US and I will keep doing this. So like a road less traveler, I will find new
[Guest]: roads there as well. And it's very scary because I haven't navigated those spaces. But I'm very
[Guest]: happy to do that. So that is what is exciting. I have definitely a film, a book, a memoir,
[Guest]: all of those in me. And I'm also very keen to, like I said, do something that is unparalleled,
[Guest]: etc, where I think that this whole creator conference, which here when I saw when I did
[Guest]: coalition, I loved. Globally, when I attended South by Southwest, I did. So I have proposed
[Guest]: three IPs with commune, which I think can be global IPs. They will happen. Again, they're
[Guest]: scary as hell to do. But we'll do that, you know. And so that's what's next. You know,
[Amit Varma]: you mentioned the ant and I thought of this old old quote, which I remember from the 80s.
[Amit Varma]: I don't know why it suddenly hit my head now. It's by Richard Bach. The quote goes, quote,
[Amit Varma]: what the caterpillar calls the end of the world, the master calls a butterfly. Stop
[Amit Varma]: quote. So inspiring words for all creators out there and just keep pushing your boundaries
[Amit Varma]: and you know, trying new things. Roshan, I could have spoken to you for many more hours,
[Amit Varma]: and hopefully we will continue this. So thank you so much for your time and insights today.
[Guest]: Not at all. And I can't tell you what an honor and a pleasure it is to be here.
[Guest]: An honor because every time I used to hear people I used to say you've got to be really
[Guest]: worthy to be there. So a little bit of a self gloat today, which I will do.
[Guest]: And and a pleasure because getting to know you as a person is something that I genuinely felt.
[Guest]: I felt that this would be the beginning of many conversations whether on a podcast or otherwise.
[Amit Varma]: So that's fabulous. Well, I would say
[Amit Varma]: since I know you're kind of weight conscious, no sugar, the ghee is fine. Thanks, Roshan.
[Amit Varma]: Thanks. Thank you.
[Amit Varma]: If you enjoyed listening to this episode, do check out the show notes,
[Amit Varma]: Rabbit Holes Abound. You can follow Roshan on Twitter at Roshan Abbas, one word. You can follow
[Amit Varma]: me on Twitter at Amit Verma, A-M-I-T-V-A-R-M-A. You can browse past episodes of The Scene and
[Amit Varma]: the Unseen at sceneunseen.in. Thank you for listening. Did you enjoy this episode of The
[Amit Varma]: Scene and the Unseen? If so, would you like to support the production of the show? You can go
[Amit Varma]: over to sceneunseen.in slash support and contribute any amount you like to keep this podcast alive
[Amit Varma]: and kicking. Thank you.